

TWO VIEWS OF EMPTINESS: 
SHENTONG AND RANGTONG 

Two Views of Emptiness: 
Shentong and Rangtong 
by 
Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche 
Geshe Lharampa 
A Commentary on the View 
as Presented in Chapter 7 of 
The Compendium of Knowledge 
by Jamgon Kongtrul Lodro Thaye 
{Tib. Shes-bya Kun-khyab-Mdzod) 
Translated by 
Peter Roberts 
Copyright ©2009 by Thrangu Rinpoche 
All rights reserved. No part of this book, either text or art, may be re­
produced in any form, electronic or otherwise, without written per­
mission from Namo Buddha Publications or Thrangu Rinpoche. 
Published by 
Namo Buddha Publications 
1390 Kalmia Avenue 
Boulder, CO 80304 
E-mail: Info@NamoBuddhaPublications.com 
Website: www.NamoBuddhaPublications.com 
Acknowledgements 
We want to thank Gaby Hollmann for the work she did in transcribing 
this manuscript. We also want to thank Deb Calloway, Steve Gilbert, 
Terry Lukas, Arthur Kuper and Jean Johnson for help editing this work. 
We also would like to thank Karen Smith and Marta Ng for their help 
on the cover. 
Notes 
This teaching was given at Thrangu House, Oxford, England in 1995. 
Tibetan words are given as they are pronounced, not spelled in Tibetan. 
Their Tibetan spelling can be found in the Glossary of Tibetan Terms. 
We use BCE (Before Current Era) for B.C. and CE (Current Era) for 
A.D. 
Thrangu Rinpoche 1933-
Two Views of Emptiness: Shentong and Rangtong by Thrangu Rin­
poche, oral translation by Peter Roberts; edited and annotated by Clark 
Johnson. 
Commentary based on Jamgon Kongtrul Lodro Thaye's Shes-bya Kun­
khyab-Mdzod 
BQ 444.K5 2008 
294.3443 K43 
ISBN 1-931571-17-1 
11 
Table of Contents 
Editor's Foreword I 
Preface II 
Chapter 1 
The Correct View of Buddha-dharma 
The Correct View of Buddha-dharma 15 
Chapter2 
Why a Correct View is Necessary 
I. Why a Correct View is Necessary 23 
Chapter3 
Developing the Wisdom that Realizes Egolessness 
II. Developing the Wisdom that Realizes Egolessness 27 
A. The Egolessness ofthe Individual 27 
B. The Egolessness of Phenomena 28 
C. The Four Incorrect Views 29 
Chapter4 
The Four Seals 
III. The Four Seals 35 
A. Seal I: Whatever is Composite is Impermanent 35 
B. Seal 2: Everything that is Impure is Suffering 36 
C. Seal3: All phenomena are Empty 37 
D. Seal4: Nirvana is Peace 37 
ChapterS 
How to Abandon the Two Extremes 
IV. Not Falling into the Two Extremes 39 
A. The Two Extremes of the Four Traditions 40 
I. The Great Exposition Tradition 40 
2. The Sutra-school Tradition 41 
3. The Mind-only Tradition 42 
4. The Middle-way Tradition 44 
111 
Shentong and Rangtong: Two Views of Emptiness 
Chapter 6 
The Middle-way School 
B. The Middle-Way School 47 
I. The Main Characteristic of the Middle-way 47 
2. The Rangtong Tradition of the Middle-way 48 
a. Sixteen Emptinesses 48 
b. Summary of the Four Emptinesses 53 
3. The Shentong Tradition 54 
a. The Three Natures 56 
b. The Fourteen Emptinesses 58 
c. Emptiness of non-existence of phenomena 64 
Chapter 7 
The Two Kinds of Egolessness 
V. Analysis of the Two Egolessnesses 69 
A. The Purpose for Teaching Egolessness 69 
I. The Two Obscurations 72 
2. Eliminating the Two Obscurations 72 
B. Analysis of Egolessness 74 
I. Egolessness of Phenomena 74 
a. Essential Meaning of Egolessness of Phenomena 74 
b. The Nature ofthe Egolessness of Self 79 
c. Why the Self of Phenomena must be Refuted 79 
d. Egolessness of Phenom. in Different Traditions 81 
e. Middle-way Analyses ofEgolessness ofPhenom. 85 
Chapter 8 
The Egolessness of the Individual 
2. The Egolessness of the Individual 
a. Essential Meaning of Egolessness of Individual 
b. The Nature of the Self of the Individual 89 
89 
94 
c. The Reasons to Negate the Self 95 
d. Egolessness of Individual in Different Traditions 96 
e. Middle-way Analyses of Ego less. of Individual 97 
3. Egolessness of Individual and Phenomena 
a. The Two Egolessnesses as One or Separate 
b. The Purpose ofTwo-fold Egolessnesses 
c. What must be Refuted Concerning Egolessness 
IV 101 
101 
101 
103 
S hen tong and Rangtong: Two Views of Emptiness 
d. Refuting the Existence of Self and Phenomena 104 
e. Analysis of Ultimate Truth 1 05 
Chapter 9 
The Two Middle-way Schools 
4. The Definitive Analyses of Middle-way Traditions 109 
a. The Rangtong School 109 
b. The Shentong School 112 
i. Three Phases of Manifestation 116 
ii. Examples of Buddha-nature 116 
iii. Difficulty Perceiving Buddha-nature. 118 
5. The Union ofthe Profound View and Vast Conduct 118 
Chapter 10 
The Vtew of the Tantras 
VI. The View of the Tantras 125 
A. The General Explanation of the Middle-way masters 125 
B. The Explanation of Gargyi Wangpo, in Particular 128 
1. Union of Appearances and Emptiness 128 
2. Union of Clarity and Emptiness 129 
3. Union of Bliss and Emptiness 129 
Chapter 11 
The Vtew of the Birth/ess Union 
VII. The View of the Birthless Union in Brief 131 
Chapter 12 
Applying these Teachings to our Practice 
Applying these Teachings to our Practice 135 
Notes 143 
Glossary 149 
Tibetan Glossary 159 
Bibliography 161 
Index 165 
v 
S bentong and Rangtong: Two Views of Emptiness 
Rangtong 
by 
Thrangu Rinpoche 
Vl 
Editors Foreword 
In this text Thrangu Rinpoche has taken a very complicated 
topic in Buddhism and provided a lucid and comprehensive 
description of the tenets of the four main schools of Bud­
dhism and the two major ways of viewing emptiness. Thrangu 
Rinpoche based this book on a section of Jamgon Kongtrul's fa­
mous Encyclopedia of Knowledge on the View. It would be im­
possible to give a better summary of this topic than Rinpoche's 
so this foreword will present some background information that 
Rinpoche was not able to include in this particular book. 
To understand Shentong and Rangtong it helps to know some 
history about the development of Buddhism. While the Buddha 
was teaching in the fourth century BCE, he had tens of thousands 
of followers and as he taught his teachings were memorized by 
highly developed practitioners known as arhats. The passing of 
religious teachings from teacher to pupil through memorization 
was a well-practiced art in India and we find that the accuracy of 
these teachings was vastly greater than, say, the passing on of 
Greek myths. Myths were often passed on by common people 
and as they were retold and retold, they changed and transformed 
much like messages in the game of "telephone" played by chil­
dren. The religious teachings in India were not greatly changed 
because they were passed on by monks specially trained in mem­
ory techniques who believed that altering even one word of the 
Buddha was a great sin. 
When the teachings of the Buddha were first written down 
in the first century of our era, they made up a corpus of about 80 
1 
Shentong and Rangtong: Two Views of Emptiness 
full-length books known as the sutras. These teachings became 
the core of the Foundation vehicle and are called the "first turn­
ing of the wheel of dharma" in this book. As the Foundation 
teachings were studied, disputes which seem very minor to us 
arose among the Foundation vehicle practitioners. For example, 
one dispute was whether a practitioner who had reached the level 
of arhat could fall back to being an ordinary being or not. This 
text describes two prominent Foundation schools-the Great Ex­
position school also known by its Sanskrit name Vaibashika and 
the Sutra followers or Sutrantika school. 
In the first century CE there were a number of major changes 
in Buddhism in India. First of all, the sutras and commentaries 
were written down so the major task of memorizing the sutras 
and passing them on was replaced by classrooms in monasteries 
in which great scholars expounded on the teaching of Buddhism 
and students began to study the texts, taking notes, receiving lec­
tures, and debating their points. Nalanda, one of the larger 
monastic colleges, had students from India, China, Kashmir, and 
Tibet who learned and debated Hindu philosophy, Foundation 
Buddhism, the newer Middle-way philosophies, as well as tech­
nical subjects such as Indian dialectics, grammar, and logic. Also 
we know that outside these monasteries there were many wan­
dering male and female yogis who were not studying the texts, 
but were developing their spiritual practice by practicing medi­
tation and engaging in tantric practices. 
The first century also produced an outstanding scholar and 
practitioner, Nagarjuna, who is credited with founding the Mid­
dle-way school. Nagarjuna is said to have gone to the naga realm 
and to have brought back the Prajnaparamita teachings. These 
Prajnaparamita teachings were mainly on the topic of emptiness 
and Nagarjuna wrote a number of important treatises which log­
ically showed that our self and outer phenomena that we all be­
lieve to be solid and real are in fact more like an illusion made up 
by mind. 
2 
The Foreword 
In particular, Nagarjuna wrote a series of treatises on empti­
ness using logical inference. Rinpoche gives a number of illus­
trations of these such as whether a "hand" is a real solid object or 
a concept of mind. These treatises were not merely philosophi­
cal discussions of whether phenomena were solid and real, but 
they became important for guiding a bodhisattva working to­
wards enlightenment. For example, in The Way of the Bodhisattva, 
an outstanding treatise on Buddhist conduct, the emptiness of 
phenomena is implied as the basis for engaging in many enlight­
ened behaviors. Why was it important to realize that the trees, 
rocks, and persons outside us have no objective reality? The an­
swer lies in the fact that if all external phenomena and experi­
ences are real and solid, it is much, much easier to become 
attached to them. Since it is attachment to these outer pleasures 
and situation that causes suffering, it is harder to renounce sam­
sara and gain liberation. One high lama once told me, "You know 
the job of being a Rinpoche (high lama) is a very boring one. 
People come night and day with all their problems, their anxi­
eties, their troubling thoughts and expect us to solve them all. Yet 
when you see the Rinpoches, they are full of good humor and 
don't seem to mind this great burden. The reason they are so joy­
ful is that they realize the emptiness of samsara and it is this 
emptiness which allows them to go on and see the humor of the 
situation." 
The great Indian masters were able to demonstrate that outer 
phenomena are indeed empty and even today we know that outer 
phenomena, in fact our entire universe as we know it, is merely 
millions of combinations of the 92 elements which we call atoms. 
But when scientists examine atoms in detail, they find that they 
are not solid, but rather complex interconnected waves of energy 
following the paradoxical laws of quantum physics. Of course, 
there were no electron microscopes or atom smashers in the first 
century so these masters relied on observations of the world 
around them and the deep introspection of their minds in medi­
tation as well as the words of the Buddha. 
3 
S bentong and Rangtong: Two Views if Emptiness 
Nagarjuna wrote a number of important treatises which sys­
tematically presented the argument that we and all outer phe­
nomena we believe to be solid and real are more like illusions 
made up by mind. The Prajnaparamita and Nagarjuna's writings 
became the foundation of the third major philosophical school 
of Buddhist philosophy, the Middle-way school, and this em­
phasis on emptiness became known as the second turning of the 
wheel of dharma. 
Several centuries later, in the fourth century CE, another 
major development attributed to two brothers, Asanga and Va­
subandu, occurred in Buddhism. Asanga went into solitary re­
treat to seek answers to his questions about the dharma from the 
Maitreya Buddha. After twelve years of difficult practice Asanga 
had cleared his mind of obstacles and developed such great spon­
taneous compassion that he was actually able to come face-to­
face with Maitreya Buddha and receive teachings from him. 
Asanga wrote down these teachings along with commentaries 
and they have been preserved to this present time as the Five 
Works ofMaitreya. One ofthe most important of these five works 
was the Ratna-gotta-vibhaga (as it it is known in Sanskrit) or the 
Uttaratantra Shastra (as it is known in Tibetan). The Ut­
taratantra is an explanation of Buddha-nature (Skt. tathagata­
garbha) which is a quality possessed by all sentient beings that 
allows them to reach enlightenment. To greatly simplify, the Ut­
taratantra states that Buddha-nature is "permanent, all-perva­
sive, and eternal." This statement basically contradicts the 
teachings of Nagarjuna that hold that nothing is permanent or 
eternal. 
As will be explained in much greater detail in Thrangu Rin­
poche 's commentary, we can think of the emptiness of phenom­
ena suggested by Asanga as having an added quality of clarity or 
luminosity. To simplify, this means that emptiness is not a vac­
uum or voidness as we imagine empty space to be, but it has the 
possibility for things to happen in it and has a knowing. A sim­
ple illustration of this is if we examine our mind carefully in med-
4 
The Foreword 
itation, we find that it is empty of anything substantial-our 
thoughts don't come from anywhere, they don't dwell anywhere, 
and they don't go anywhere. In other words, they don't have any 
real substantiality, yet there is clearly a stream of awareness that 
is always there which we can call a clarity or knowing aspect of 
mind. This luminous clarity as it is called in the text is there while 
we are awake, while we are asleep (when we dream), and actu­
ally has been there in our previous life times. These teachings of 
Asanga and Vasubandhu concerning Buddha-nature and lumi­
nous clarity have become what is now called the third turning of 
the wheel of dharma. 
During the time of Asanga and Vasubandu there also devel­
oped a fourth major school of Buddhist philosophy called the 
Mind-only school. This school holds that everything-external 
phenomena and internal thoughts and feeling are basically cre­
ated by mind. It is hard to believe that everything is created by 
mind and their position is described in great detail in Thrangu 
Rinpoche 's commentary on Distinguishing Consciousness from 
Wisdom. 
Young children learn to talk quickly and readily no matter 
what language they are learning. After being told that an object 
is, for example, "a chair," they will automatically recognize a 
chair whether it has 3 legs or 4 legs, is functional to sit on or just 
a decoration, made of wood or of rocks, whether it has a back or 
not, whether it is for a prisoner or a king, and so on. The three and 
four year old child can do this for "man," "woman," "boat," 
"house," "mountain," and so on while the most sophisticated 
computer or the science of linguistics cannot explain how this 
happens. The Mind-only adherents suggest that this is possible 
because the child is not simply a blank tabula rasa, but has had 
many, many. lifetimes before in which the child interacted with 
these objects so the child has the concept of many objects already 
stored in his or her eighth "store-house" consciousness. 
Taking another example of how mind is so important is the 
example of when we dream. While we are dreaming, the sensory 
5 
Shentong and Rangtong: Two Views of Emptiness 
consciousnesses are shut down and the seventh consciousness 
which is the "self' begins to receive perceptual information from 
the storehouse consciousness and this input is so vivid that we be­
lieve it is really happening to us even though we may be dream­
ing that we are doing something fantastic such as flying. 
Throughout a dream we have one part of our mind which is an 
awareness, a self or I, which is perceiving what is going on and 
there must also be another part of our mind which is creating the 
dream. Sometimes these two functions of mind are quite distinct 
so we actually don't know how the dream will tum out and at 
other times these two functions bleed together and we either 
know what is going to happen in the dream or have an ability to 
change the "script" or outcome of the dream. The Mind-only 
view is that when we are awake, the outside sensory information 
is so vivid that we believe that it is real and how we are inter­
preting what is happening to us is based on what is stored in our 
store-house eighth consciousness. 
Karl Brunnholzl has done a careful survey of the Mind-only 
school and shown that there are many misconceptions about this 
school. First, the name "mind-only" correctly indicates that this 
school holds that everything we perceive outside us is actually 
based on our mind. To give a rather crude example, when we 
walk our dog, we see and understand it is summer because there 
are bright colored flowers and the weather is warm, but we can't 
tell anything about who was on the path even a half an hour ago. 
Our dog, however, sees only shades of gray, doesn't perceive the 
season, but by smelling the grass and bushes knows what dogs 
have been there, how long ago they were there and where they 
went. Clearly, our dog walking along the exact same landscape 
has a reality completely different from ours based on the dog's 
karma, way of perceiving, interests, and conceptualizations. 
According to Brunnholzl in his comprehensive The Center 
of the Sunlit Sky there are no texts of this fourth Mind-only school 
existent beyond those of Asanga and Vasubandhu. So he suggests 
that it is more appropriate to call this school the "School ofVast 
6 
The Foreword 
Conduct" and the Middle-way school the "School of Profound 
View." This helps because later on in history the Tibetans who 
held the teachings of Nagarjuna and the second turning (the 
Rangtong school) usually dismissed the Shentong view by say­
ing that the Shentong was just "mere mind" meaning an incorrect 
Mind-only school view. 
By the thirteenth century of our era, the great monastic col­
leges of Northern India were being attacked and burned to the 
ground by invading Moslem armies. Buddhism was disappearing 
rapidly from its country of origin-India-and everything we 
know about the second and third turnings would have been lost 
had it not been for numerous Indian and Chinese religious pil­
grims who came to India from the first to thirteenth century and 
took back vast quantities of religious texts. At this time the Ti­
betans had built small and large monasteries housing monks who 
studied and practiced Buddhism and had actually started writing 
their own commentaries on the words of the Buddha. During this 
time the Middle-way teachings of Nagarjuna were extensively 
analyzed and taught along with many of the Mind-only teach­
ings. The actual meditation practice also flourished at this time, 
but was not based on the sutra teachings on emptiness, but on the 
tantras. This is still the trend in Tibetan monasteries so that when 
the monks reach college age, they apply to the monastic college 
or shedra and there they often spend 12 hours a day doing aca­
demic work and memorizing large treatises such as those ofNa­
garjuna and Chandrakirti while doing little practice beyond the 
required sadhanas of the day. It is only after they have completed 
the 5 or 7 or 12 years of shedra, that they begin serious medita­
tion based on the tantras by doing the equivalent of a three-year 
retreat. 
Hookham in his pioneering work on the Shentong, The Bud­
dha Within, makes a compelling case that when Buddhism was 
first introduced into Tibet in the seventh century, the second turn­
ing put forth by the scholars of the monastic colleges was ac­
cepted as correct thus bolstering the Rangtong position, while the 
7 
Shentong and Rangtong: Two Views of Emptiness 
Mind-only teachings of the third turning were deemed to be in­
ferior. However, when it came to actual meditation and spiritual 
practice, the tantric methods and texts and the oral instructions 
which were more aligned with the third turning and the Shen­
tong teachings were ultimately practiced. For example, Naropa, 
a great Madhyamaka scholar, left a high position at Nalanda 
Monastic college to study under the mystic siddha Tilopa living 
in the forest. The great Kadampa scholar Atisha threw out the 
siddha Maitripa from his monastery for practicing tantric prac­
tices and then later actually went and received teachings from 
him. It was the siddha Maitripa who found the Uttaratantra and 
its commentary by Asanga in a crack in a stupa in the eleventh 
century in India. So in Tibet one had the Rangtong view repre­
sented by academic study of the second turning and the Shen­
tong view based on the third turning teachings which support the 
actual Vajrayana practices and meditation oftantra. 
Also in the 13th century in Tibet, a remarkable man­
Dolpopa-was born who not only studied the traditional Mid­
dle-way texts, but also did extensive practice of the Kalachakra 
tantra and the Six Yogas. It is said that during this extensive prac­
tice he went to Shambhala, met with the King of Shambhala, the 
Kalkin, and returned with new insights into the Buddhist teach­
ings. While building the largest stupa in Tibet in 1313, he fully 
developed his understanding and began writing his major work, 
Mountain Doctrine. In Mountain Doctrine Dolpopa not only in­
cluded a vast number of quotations from the sutras and Middle­
way texts, but also quoted many of the tantras and their 
commentaries. He stated that the traditional Middle-way ap­
proach, which he coined the word "Rangtong" (self-empty), was 
incorrect and reality should be looked at from a new approach 
for which he coined the word "Shentong" (empty of other). He 
argued that the Buddha prophesied the future coming of both Na­
garjuna and Asanga and clearly the Shakyamuni Buddha and the 
Maitreya Buddha were of equal authenticity. Therefore one could 
not say that Nagarjuna's works were "definitive" and Asanga's 
8 
The Foreword 
works were "provisional." So when the Uttaratantra Shastra 
says that Buddha-nature is all-pervasive and eternal, it should be 
taken at face value and not relegated to some mistaken "provi­
sional" doctrine. 
Steams in his Buddha from Dolpopa presented the first Eng­
lish language book discussing Dolpopa's controversial position in 
the Shcntong lineage. He traced Dolpopa's influence on 
Longchenpa of the Nyingma lineage and the Third Karmapa, 
Rangjung Dorje, of the Kagyu lineage who wrote Distinguish­
ing Consciousness and Wisdom and On Buddha Essence to ex­
plain the Shentong view. 
Hookham in The Buddha Within states, "The distinction be­
tween self-emptiness (Rangtong) and Emptiness-of-other (Shen­
tong) is not merely, nor indeed primarily, of academic interest. It 
has implications of profound proportions for the Buddhist prac­
titioner, touching on his whole attitude to himself, the world, the 
Guru and others, the path, and above all meditation practice." 
What are the implications to how one practices Buddhism? 
Taking a simple example, the Rangtong position is that Buddha­
nature is like a seed that must grow and be nurtured to develop 
into full-blown enlightenment. The Shentong position is that 
Buddha-nature is already fully developed and one must elimi­
nate the adventitious stains or disturbing emotions which cover 
it. So the whole path to how we actually reach enlightenment can 
be the technique to nurture the seed of enlightenment or it can 
be a path of removing the stains hiding the enlightenment which 
is already fully blossomed. Thrangu Rinpoche once told the story 
that when he was young and studying emptiness intensively, he 
thought that he didn't need to make offering to the protectors. 
Things did not go well for him and when he started making of­
fering at the suggestion of his tutor, things began to go much bet­
ter. He used ·this example to show that we can't think of 
everything as merely emptiness (as suggested by the Rangtong), 
but must also consider the luminous clarity of emptiness (as sug­
gested in the Shentong). If we are using Vajrayana techniques 
9 
5 hen tong and Rangtong: Two Views if Emptiness 
such as deity practice to achieve enlightenment, the question be­
comes, "Are the deities just creations ofthe mind as suggested by 
the Rangtong?" or "Are they real and part of ultimate reality as 
suggested by Dolpopa in the Shentong?" What we believe the 
answer to this question to be is of profound importance in how 
we actually do our spiritual practice. For this reason we are very 
fortunate to have this valuable text which gives an impartial and 
understandable overview of this topic. 
Clark Johnson 
Boulder, Colorado 
10 
The Preface 
When it comes to Buddhist philosophy and the Rang­
tong and Shentong in particular, many students have 
rather interesting reactions. Some people feel trepida­
tion that they will not be able to understand and thus might not 
even want to begin to study and contemplate. Some people might 
wonder how this could possibly help their practice and would 
rather just sit and meditate. For others, one view or the other 
piques their interest and excitement, and they are smitten. Out of 
attachment to their favorite view, they might think that the Rang­
tong must be the ultimate and the Shentong just a provisional 
teaching tinged with clinging, or that the Shentong teaches the 
true, great middle way and that the Rangtong is only a partial 
truth. Oftentimes you cannot blame someone for reacting in such 
a way: if you read many Buddhist books, you will soon come 
across words that on the surface support or even encourage any 
of these reactions. 
But they are all somewhat limited. Of course we all have dif­
ferent inclinations and capabilities and should practice the 
dharma which best suits our own natures, but we should not dis­
miss any of the other teachings of the Buddha out of fear, igno­
rance, or attachment. The Buddha taught the views that later 
came to be called the rangtong and shentong for the simple rea­
son that contemplating and understanding them can help us in 
our meditation practice. If we have misconceptions about the na-
11 
Shentong and Rangtong: Two Views of Emptiness 
ture of reality we will not be able to progress in our meditation, 
so it is important to contemplate both the Rangtong and Shen­
tong views. And despite their fearsome reputation, the Rangtong 
and Shentong are something that we can contemplate and come 
to understand. 
In the following pages, Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche de­
scribes the meaning and significance of both of these views in 
simple and clear language. Whenever Rinpoche discusses the 
Rangtong and Shentong, he stresses how important they both are: 
they both teach the ultimate nature of reality. The Rangtong view 
stresses the emptiness of all phenomena so that we do not cling 
to things as being solid and real. The Shentong view stresses the 
clear wisdom, inherently full of qualities and potential, so that 
we do not think that the true nature is mere nothingness. Although 
in words these two may sound like different things, in reality they 
are inseparable. The clear nature of the mind is not a solid thing 
that we can find or establish, but it is not a mere inanimate empti­
ness, devoid of anything at all. This is what we call the union of 
wisdom and emptiness, the union of clarity and emptiness, the 
union of wisdom and emptiness. By studying emptiness and the 
Rangtong and Shentong views, we can come to understand the 
reasons why the nature of mind is the way it is and develop cer­
tainty in it. 
Even though this is just a conceptual understanding and cer­
tainty, it will help us in our meditation practice. Whether we are 
meditating on a yidam deity or practicing Mahamudra or 
Dzogchen, we need to know why it is that we are meditating and 
why it is that meditation can work. Then when we have experi­
ences in our practice, we can remember, "Oh, this is what they 
mean when they say the mind is emptiness. That is what they 
mean by clarity and luminosity." We will be better able to rec­
ognize signs of progress for what they are and better able to see 
through whatever deceptive temporary experiences might hap­
pen. This is why it is important for us to read and contemplate 
books such as this. 
12 
The Preface 
Above all, we must always remember our good fortune to be 
alive and human now at a time when Khenchen Thrangu Rin­
poche and other masters are giving us these precious teachings 
and they are being made available in languages we can under­
stand. Rinpoche has spent decades traveling the globe and ex­
plaining the view and meditation out of the simple wish to help 
all of us achieve stable and long-lasting happiness. We owe Rin­
poche a great deal of gratitude for this kindness. But it takes more 
than just Rinpoche's efforts alone to bring these teachings to us; 
it also takes the hard work and diligence of devoted students. 
Over the last three decades, Clark Johnson has spent all of his 
free time working to support Rinpoche's projects and publish his 
teachings. It is largely because of his unwearying efforts that so 
many ofRinpoche's teachings are available in English now. This 
book is could only have been published because of his initiative 
and diligence, so I would like to thank him for all his service. I 
would also like to thank Carole Lamarche for her devotion and 
willingness to proofread and edit the manuscript. This has been 
an indispensable help. 
Rinpoche has said that when we call a teaching profound, 
what we really mean is helpful. I sincerely hope that you find the 
teachings in this book helpful not only in your dharma practice 
but also in how you see the things that happen in your daily life. 
I pray that whatever small efforts have gone into this book help 
Rinpoche's teachings bring you happiness now and in the future. 
May joy and goodness fill the entire world! 
The sramanera Karma Lodro Choephel 
Boudhanath, Nepal 
February I 0, 2008 
13 
Shentong and Rangtong: Two Views of Emptiness 
Jamgon Kongtrul, Lodro Thaye (1813-1899) 
One of the most famous Tibetan teachers of the 19th century. He is 
known as one of the Eclectic (reme) teachers who collected teachings 
from many traditions including those on the verge of extinction. His 
main work was the Five Treasures or The Compendium of Knowledge. 
14 
1 
The Correct View of Buddha-dharma 
The reason we practice the Buddhist dharma is to attain lib­
eration. To gain this, we must engage in meditation and if 
we want our meditation to be effective, we need to have 
the correct philosophical view. 
Jamgon Kongtrul Lodro Thaye's book, The Compendium of 
Knowledge, consists often chapters, each of which is subdivided 
into four parts. This teaching is based on the seventh chapter, 
which deals with the topic of wisdom. The seventh chapter is di­
vided into four subdivisions, with the third subdivision explain­
ing the correct view. This view gives us a foundation for 
understanding dharma practice, including how to practice and 
achieve the result. 
Phenomena have two distinct aspects: the conventional or 
relative level of reality and the ultimate or absolute level of real­
ity. 1 The conventional or relative nature of phenomena is suffer­
ing, difficulties, problems, and obstacles. On the ultimate or 
absolute level, t~e true nature of phenomena is the cessation of 
suffering and its obstacles. To become free of the conventional 
view we must realize the true nature first. The true nature2 is ac­
tually experiencing the emptiness of phenomena. The study of 
this view of emptiness of phenomena comes from the Middle-
15 
Shentong and Rangtong: Two Views of Emptiness 
way,3 (Skt. Madhyamaka) school ofBuddhism. Within the Mid­
dle-way school there are two main views of emptiness: the Rang­
tong and the Shentong view. 
The Buddha, born a prince, abandoned his samsaric life. He 
endured many hardships through ascetic practices, but then at­
tained Buddhahood at the foot of a bodhi tree. Having attained 
awakening, enlightenment, the Buddha thought, "I have attained 
this very profound clarity, and beneficial condition through my 
meditation and perseverance. If I were to try to explain how to 
meditate and practice, others would not understand. Therefore it 
is best to remain in meditation." The Buddha then remained in 
meditation for seven weeks, believing that there was no way to 
transmit his realization to others. It was only through Brahma 
and lndra supplicating and pleading with the Buddha, that the 
Buddha set the wheel of dharma in motion and began to teach 
the profound Dharma. 
Turning the Three Wheels of Dharma 
Because the Buddha had many students at different levels of 
understanding, he did not give the same teachings to everyone. To 
those with lesser wisdom and diligence, he gave easier teachings 
and to those with superior wisdom and diligence, he gave the 
more complex teachings. To those students with lesser wisdom 
and diligence, he offered the Foundation vehicle which involved 
teaching that the nature of samsara is suffering and that one can 
attain personal liberation from suffering through one's own ef­
forts. The cause of this suffering in cyclic existence or samsara 
is our disturbing emotions (Skt. klesha), 4 which we cannot elim­
inate through force. To gain liberation from samsara, we must 
destroy the root cause of our disturbing emotions, which is the 
belief in and attachment to a self. 
There is a method by which we can eliminate this belief in a 
self which is the attachment to "I" or "me." If we examine the self 
16 
The Correct View of Buddha-dharma 
carefully and try to discover what and where it is, we will not be 
able to find anything that is "I." It cannot be logically established. 
Through this careful reasoning process, we will come to under­
stand that the thought "I" has no inherent reality. There is no "1." 
It is only a delusion. This understanding undermines the belief in 
a self and thus cuts the root ofthe disturbing emotions. The Bud­
dha taught this method of analysis in the Foundation vehicle and 
showed how to attain liberation from samsara by realizing the 
"selflessness or egolessness of the individual. "5 
In the second turning of the wheel of dharma, the Buddha 
taught the methods of the Mahayana (the greater vehicle). The 
scope of the Mahayana is deeper than the Foundation because 
here we are concerned with not only helping ourselves, but also 
with helping all other sentient beings. In the first turning we may 
fear the suffering of samsara as long as we believe that it has true 
existence. However, in the second turning, the Buddha taught 
that phenomena of samsara are also empty of any inherent true 
nature. Realizing the emptiness of phenomena, 6 the belief and 
attachment to a self will be finally eliminated. 
The teachings of the Mahayana were called "the middle turn­
ing" (the second of the three vehicles), in which the Buddha 
taught that all phenomena (whether body, mind, or material 
things) have no inherent nature of their own. All phenomena are 
devoid of a true nature and are therefore empty. By seeing the 
emptiness of all phenomena, we can become free from the belief 
in and attachment to a personal self and of phenomena's illusion. 
We also become free from fear of suffering as well as from ac­
tual suffering. Having freedom from suffering and the fear of suf­
fering, we are in a position to truly help other beings. The 
Buddha's teaching on emptiness in the second turning was in the 
Prajnaparamita ·sutra of I 00,000 verses, in the medium-sized 
Prajnaparamita sutra of 25,000, in a shorter Prajnaparamita of 
8,000 verses, down to a very short Heart Sutra of a few hundred 
words. In these sutras he taught that there is no form, no sound, 
17 
Shentong and Rai!J!/ong: 1/JJo Views of Emptiness 
no taste, no smell, and no tangible existence; nothing has a true 
nature of its own and thus the nature of all things is empty. 
The first and second turnings, however, are not complete 
teachings because we still must understand emptiness in its cor­
rect profundity. We might think that emptiness 7 is like empty 
space, that it is like the vacuum of space or like a corpse being 
empty of life. Emptiness (Skt. shunyata, Tib. tong pa nyi) is nei­
ther like empty space nor like a corpse, because emptiness actu­
ally possesses the wisdom and luminous clarity (Tib. salwa)8 of 
mind. If we make the error of thinking that emptiness is an ab­
sence or voidness of things, we will not understand emptiness 
properly. So the Buddha turned the wheel of dharma a third time 
in which he taught that emptiness is not just voidness, but rather 
emptiness is the foundation or basis from which all the qualities 
and wisdom of a Buddha arise. In the third turning, the Buddha 
explained that emptiness has the transcendent qualities of Bud­
dha-nature (Skt. tathagata-garbha) 9 and luminosity. 
The Tibetan Tradition 
The Buddha turned the wheel of the dharma three times. The 
words ofthe Buddha in these three turnings were collected into 
the sutras which were not always self-explanatory nor easy to 
comprehend. As a result, the great masters and scholars of India 
wrote commentaries called shastras on the Buddha's teachings. 
The shastras explained the meaning of what the Buddha taught. 
By compiling these treatises, the masters clarified the sutras and 
gave logical reasons elucidating the Buddha's words. Two main 
masters who composed shastras on emptiness were Nagarjuna 
and Asanga. Nagarjuna concentrated on the teachings of the sec­
ond turning of the wheel of dharma while Asanga concentrated 
on the teachings of the third turning of the wheel of dharma. 
Many of the Buddha's teachings were translated into Tibetan 
in the Kangyur. In Tibet there is a tradition of studying these trea-
18 
The Correct View of Buddha-dharma 
tises or shastras composed by great Indian Buddhist masters, 
rather than studying the Buddha's actual words. The reason Ti­
betan scholars studied the Tengyur (which contains many of the 
shastras) rather than the Kangyur (containing the actual words 
of the Buddha) is that at times the Buddha gave students who had 
great understanding very profound teachings and at other times 
he taught students with little understanding simplified and less 
difficult teachings. Sometimes he presented very extensive teach­
ings and sometimes he presented condensed teachings. The great 
Indian Buddhist masters were able to simplify the extensive 
teachings and to expound and clarify the concise meaning. This 
is why the shastras are studied in the Tibetan tradition and not in 
the original words of the Buddha. 
The Tibetan scholars and masters classified the teachings into 
the three turnings of the wheel of dharma. They showed that the 
middle turning of the wheel of dharma emphasized the view of 
the Middle-way school. These teachings were then called the 
"Rangtong" view ("empty of itself'). The third turning of the 
wheel of dharma emphasized luminous clarity and Buddha-na­
ture, and the Tibetan scholars called these the "Shentong" view 
("empty of other"). Some Tibetan scholars emphasized and prac­
ticed the Rangtong view, while other Tibetan scholars empha­
sized and practiced the Shentong view. For example, Tsongkhapa 
wrote many commentaries on the second turning of the wheel of 
dharma putting forth the Rangtong view while the Eighth 
Karmapa Mikyo Dorje wrote texts refuting Tsongkapa's conclu­
sions and put forward the Shentong view. Taranatha wrote texts 
on the Shentong view and other scholars wrote texts refuting his 
view. All of this doesn't mean, however, that one view is better 
than the other because each view is important in itself. 
19 
Shentong and Rangtong: Two Views of Emptiness 
Questions 
Question: Could Rinpoche explain the words Rangtong and 
Shentong? 
Rinpoche: The Tibetan word Rang means "self' and tong means 
"empty." meaning that phenomena are empty and devoid of their 
own nature. Relative phenomena have no true reality; they are 
devoid of a nature oftheir own, of a self-nature. 
The Tibetan word shen means "other" and tong means 
"empty" meaning devoid of that which is other, with "other" 
being the impurities. The essence ofShentong emptiness is lumi­
nous clarity, not voidness. That is the teaching of emptiness as 
taught by the Shentong. 
Question: Most of the time when I read texts, unless it is talking 
about the Buddha-nature, I am not actually aware of whether it 
is Rangtong or Shentong. But I also recognize, especially when 
reading the Gelug texts, that there is an underlying trend that is 
leading me into some direction. Is Rinpoche saying that it is quite 
important to make an analysis so that one can place that in Rang­
tong or Shentong? 
Rinpoche: In this text, Rangtong and Shentong are explained 
specifically. However, when reading Buddhist books, it is not im­
portant to wonder whether it is the Rangtong or Shentong view. 
Just read Buddhist books without thinking about Rangtong and 
Shentong. 
Question: I was wondering about the Buddha-nature. Is it the 
sense of a self-existing as an entity? 
Rinpoche: People believe that the self exists as an entity and 
they don't examine what it is as long as they believe this. How­
ever, Buddha-nature is different from the belief in a self. 
20 
Developing the Wisdom that Realizes Egolessness 
Question: Is clarity or luminosity Shentong? 
Rinpoche: Yes, the nature of emptiness is luminosity in the 
Shentong. 
Questions: How can Rangtong practitioners achieve Buddha­
hood since they are only realizing non-reality? 
Rinpoche: Practitioners of the Rangtong view attain Buddha­
hood because what prevents us from achieving Buddhahood is 
attachment to the self as an individual and attachment to the self 
of phenomena. If one realizes emptiness, then attachment to are­
ality of the self and phenomena is eliminated. Once that belief in 
reality is dispelled, one can attain Buddhahood. There is a dif­
ference, though, in terms of how easy meditation is or isn't. 
Question: Would the Rangtong school then have an incorrect 
view? 
Rinpoche: No, because they have realized the absence of there­
ality in phenomena. Having seen the true nature of reality, one is 
led to that point in the Rangtong view; one is gradually brought 
to that state through the path of examining, analyzing, and see­
ing the absence of reality of phenomena. If one does not meditate 
properly, it can be an obstacle to one's practice. Nagarjuna said 
that it is worse to believe in non-existence than in existence. The 
correct view in meditation is necessary in order to achieve a right 
result. 
21 
Shentong and Rangtong: Two Views rf Emptiness 
)O 
Shentong 
by 
Thrangu Rinpoche 
22 
2 
Why A Correct View Is Necessary 
I. WHY THE CORRECT VIEW IS NECESSARY 
This text of Jamgon Kongtrul has seven major points. The 
first main point explains why it is necessary to have the 
correct view and that it is not beneficial to practice with­
out the correct view; this would be like walking around in dark­
ness. Why is a correct view necessary? Although we wish to 
achieve Buddhahood, something prevents us from achieving lib­
eration from samsara. What prevents us from achieving liberation 
is the arising of the disturbing emotions in the mind. The source 
of disturbing emotions is ignorance, the state of not knowing and 
of not understanding. It is necessary to eliminate the state of ig­
norance so that the root of the disturbing emotions will be re­
moved. Ignorance10 is eliminated by the correct view. By having 
clarity and confidence in how things truly are, ignorance is dis­
pelled, the disturbing emotions cease, and liberation from sam­
sara and suffering is attained. This is the reason why the view is 
so very important. 
The correct view is the understanding of the ultimate nature 
of all phenomena, of the true nature of things. It is necessary to 
23 
Shentong and Rangtong: Two Views rf Emptiness 
have correct conduct, with the word "correct" meaning "in har­
mony with the view." Conduct exists within the realm of the con­
ventional nature of phenomena. Conduct must therefore be 
correct in relation to conventional truth because in the view of the 
ultimate truth there is no such thing as killing, stealing, and neg-
ative conduct. Does this imply that it is all right to kill? No, be­
cause if one kills, on the relative level this will be a crime and this 
act will cause negative karma. Does this mean that it is all right 
to steal? No, because if one steals, then on the relative level the 
law is broken. Therefore, one needs to have correct conduct both 
in terms of conventional truth and in terms of ultimate truth. If 
one can develop the view of the ultimate truth, then one will have 
wisdom that will eliminate ignorance. This wisdom eliminates 
ignorance and becomes the cause of liberation. 
Correct conduct must always be accompanied by the correct 
view. We develop correct conduct by avoiding negative actions 
and by practicing positive actions within the realm of conven­
tional truth. All correct conduct must be accompanied by the view 
of emptiness because correct conduct alone will not bring about 
the state of meditation, or the attainment of the general and 
supreme siddhis, or the goal of Buddhahood. Anything we are 
doing must be accompanied by the profound view of emptiness. 
Similarly our meditation should always be accompanied by the 
view of emptiness; otherwise that meditation will be nothing 
more than a relaxed mental state. 
The dharmadhatu (the true nature of all phenomena) is the 
basis for all of the Buddha's teachings, whether it is the teachings 
on the egolessness of the individual (as taught in the Foundation 
vehicle) or the teachings on the emptiness of phenomena (as 
taught in the Mahayana). When contemplating the teachings on 
emptiness, we should not conclude, "Oh, all things are empty and 
void." Rather we need to have a strong understanding of the true 
nature of phenomena, to the degree that we think, "Oh, this is 
what the Buddha meant. This is what the Buddha taught." 
24 
W~y a Correct View is Necessary 
The teachings of the Buddha can be divided into the sutra and 
the tantra teachings. We analyze and contemplate while studying 
the sutras so that we can attain a very definite understanding of 
the nature of phenomena. Some Tibetan scholars have said that 
developing definite certainty in a teaching should not rely on 
what others have said was true. For example, we shouldn't be­
lieve in something because somebody proclaims, "This is what 
the Buddha said." Furthermore, we shouldn't conclude, "It must 
be true because my guru said so." Rather, we should gain cer­
tainty by understanding exactly how things or phenomena truly 
are and not be swayed by what other people think. We should not 
doubt our certainty and allow our belief to be undermined by 
thinking, "Well, that person is right and I am wrong," when 
someone says we are incorrect. Instead, we need to develop a 
definite conviction inside us based on our own understanding 
without being influenced one way or another by other people. 
The sutra approach is gaining an understanding about reality 
through inference and logical deduction; we contemplate and 
think about the teachings and through this process develop a cer­
tainty about their validity. 
In the tantra or Vajrayana tradition, there is not much em­
phasis on logical reasoning. Instead there is emphasis on direct 
understanding which the texts call, "the mind looking at itself 
and seeing itself directly."11 If the mind is something that exists, 
then we will see it directly, that is, we will have a direct under­
standing which does not depend upon thoughts and deduction. A 
direct understanding of emptiness gained through meditation is 
the approach in the Vajrayana. 
In the section on the view, however, Jamgon Kongtrul de­
scribes the understanding that is gained through analysis and de­
duction. We do not need to have direct experience and knowledge 
through meditation at this point but meditation becomes more 
stable if there is definite understanding gained through analysis 
and deduction. This is the reason why Jamgon Kongtrul presents 
the view through the process of the intellect in this chapter. 
25 
Jhentong and Rangtong: 7ivo Vie2vs rf Emptiness 
To gain a definite understanding of emptiness, it is necessary 
first to receive the teachings from a teacher, to read the texts of 
great masters, or to study the sutras taught by the Buddha, so that 
one can have a strong foundation of the Buddha's teachings. 
Thus, there is the wisdom or prajna that comes from studying 
(literally "from hearing the teachings"). It is not sufficient to sim­
ply know what the Buddha taught; one needs also to contemplate 
the teachings in order to understand why the teachings are cor­
rect. Then one gains the wisdom or prajna that comes from con­
templating the teachings. Both wisdoms are necessary, the 
wisdom arising from learning and the wisdom arising from con­
templating the teachings. 
26 
3 
Developing the Wisdom 
that Realizes Egolessness 
II. DEVELOPING WISDOM THAT REALIZES EGOLESSNESS 
Jamgon Kongtrul said that it is necessary to have the correct 
view in order to eliminate the source of the disturbing emo­
tions in the mind that prevent liberation. That is why we need 
to have the correct view and understand the reasons for having 
the correct view which were discussed in the previous chapter. 
The second section of this text on the view deals with the need for 
developing wisdom that realizes egolessness. 
A. EGOLESSNESS OF THE INDIVIDUAL 
The basis of the view is egolessness which is called in the su­
tras "the view of what will be destroyed." This view explains the 
aggregates (Skt. skandha) which continually change, are accu­
mulated, and are destroyed. All of the aggregates are imperma­
nent, undergo change, and are eventually destroyed. What is new 
eventually decays, becomes old, and finally ends. We are not a 
single entity but rather a coming together of the five aggregates 
(form, feeling, perception, mental formations, and conscious­
ness). These various components will change and eventually 
27 
S bentong and Rangtong: Two Views rf Emptiness 
come to an end. The components are also not single. For exam­
ple, a form (such as the body) does not consist of one single unit 
but is made up of components that are continually changing and 
being destroyed. The view of the self also is called "the view of 
that which will be destroyed" because it is a view founded upon 
the aggregates coming together and then dispersing. 
Even though elements come together and make up an entity 
composed of many different things, we think ofthem as a single 
entity. For example, our body is composed of many parts and yet 
we consider ourselves to be a single individual. We see ourselves 
as "one being," as an "I" or a "self' who took birth, has grown 
older and will die. But, in fact, the self is a composite of chang­
ing aggregates that come together, undergo change, and will fi­
nally end. As babies we had a small body and the thoughts of a 
baby. As a grown-up we have another body and the thoughts of 
an adult. As long as we are not aware of the changes that take 
place from childhood through adolescence to old age, we think of 
ourselves as a single individual. Ifwe examine this closely, how­
ever, we discover that there is no place where the self exists and 
that the view of a self is nothing but a delusion. This is the delu­
sion based on ignorance that must be eliminated. 
8. THE EGOLESSNESS OF PHENOMENA 
Because attachment to a self is a delusion, the object of at­
tachment varies and is not one definite thing. We may want to 
distinguish between "I" and a "mind," in which case we see the 
mind as "my mind," with "I" owning the separate "mind." Or we 
can see the body as "my body," in which case the "I" which 
seems to own the "body" which is seen as "I" and "mind" to­
gether. Or we can think of clothes as "my clothes," in which case 
the "I" seems to own the clothes, that is, the body and mind to­
gether with these clothes. Or we can generalize even further and 
think of a larger context such as "my house," "my district," "my 
country," and so on. In these cases the "my" has the same shift-
28 
Developing the Wisdom that Realizes Egolessness 
ing relationship of ownership which has little reality to the phe­
nomena themselves. Furthermore, when we think of"my house," 
our mind automatically distinguishes between "my" and "other" 
houses. This is a false belief because if we look for "mine" and 
"other" in the houses themselves, they cannot actually be dis­
covered. 
When the mind identifies things as being something they are 
not, this state of cognition is called "confusion" or "ignorance." 
Believing something that has no self (i.e. as empty) as being a 
self (i.e. being solid and real) is the state of ignorance. The na­
ture of ignorance is delusion, an incorrect understanding. We 
have attachment to a self in the state of delusion. As long as there 
is attachment to a self one holds four incorrect views, views 
which are erroneously held as being true. 
C. THE FOUR INCORRECT VIEWS 
There are four incorrect views that interfere with realiza­
tion ofthe true nature of reality. The first incorrect view is that if 
we examine the body from the top of the head to the soles of the 
feet, we will not find a precious substance but will find only 
blood, flesh, and bones, which are impure things. The body is 
composed of impure substances, but because we identify it with 
the self, we consider it very precious, very pure, and invaluable. 
We fail to see that it is composed of impure substances and so 
we conclude, "Since this body is my very own self, it is of great 
importance." That is the first incorrect view, seeing the impure as 
pure. The sutras list thirty-six impure substances that make up 
the physical body-skin, flesh, bile, mucous, and other sub­
stances. There isn't a single thing that is of any value or can be 
called "precious" among these thirty-six components. But be­
cause we identify the body with the self, we have great attach­
ment to our body and identify the impure as being pure. 
The second incorrect view is seeing suffering as happiness. 
We experience illness, problems, misery, and suffering in life but 
29 
S hen tong and Rangtong: Two Views rf Emptiness 
where do all of these difficulties and obstacles come from? They 
come from attachment to the self. As long as we mistakenly per­
ceive the world, we think that pain and misery come from outside 
ourselves. By failing to understand the source of suffering, we 
think others bring pain and affliction upon us. We do not realize 
that attachment to the self is the source of all our suffering. 
There is a story about Patrul Rinpoche from Kham who trav­
eled to Central Tibet with an attendant in order to make an of­
fering of one hundred units of money. He and his attendant had 
so much money that they worried about being robbed. Therefore, 
while one person slept, the other stayed awake to be on the guard 
so nobody would rob and kill them. They also feared being at­
tacked by robbers during the day, so one kept watch behind while 
the other ran ahead and held lookout. They had a terrible time 
and Patrul Rinpoche thought, "This is awful. We can't sleep at 
night and can hardly move during the day. The only reason we are 
having so much trouble is because of the money." He threw the 
money into the river and told his attendant, "Now we are fine. 
We can carry on without any worries and there is nobody to be 
afraid of. The enemy was the money and it caused all the trou­
ble." He continued, "We had such an attachment to the money 
and that was the source of our suffering." 
The third incorrect view is seeing impermanent objects as 
being permanent. At birth we are very small and then we grow 
and eventually become old, so there is a change in our body as 
well as in our mind. In spite of the change that takes place, we 
think of ourselves as a single unchanging entity. We think, "This 
is me from the time of birth until now." We identify imperma­
nent things as "mine" such as "my body, my clothes, my house, 
my money" and so on. This incorrect view of what is permanent 
and impermanent comes about because of our attachment to the 
self that causes anger, desire, pride, and the other disturbing emo­
tions to arise. If we have this attachment to the belief in a self, 
then we will have all four incorrect views or perceptions. If we 
can eliminate attachment to a self, then all four incorrect views 
30 
Developing the Wisdom that Realizes Egolessness 
will be eliminated. 
The fourth incorrect view is to see phenomena as solid and 
real and not as empty. The Sanskrit term for "the self," is atman. 
It can be applied in its wider sense to all external phenomena. 
We can hold the belief in a self or in the solid entity of all exter­
nal phenomena. Instead of seeing all phenomena as they truly 
are, we think of them as having a reality of their own. Even 
though all things are composed of many factors that are contin­
ually changing, we think of all things as having substantial real­
ity which is attachment to the ego or self of phenomena. Atman 
can be applied to all phenomena. In a subtler way, atman applies 
to the five aggregates that make up an individual (form, sensa­
tion, recognition, mental formations, and consciousness). Each 
aggregate is indefinite and continually changing. The body con­
sists of many factors that continually undergo a process of 
change. Even though all the aggregates that make up an individ­
ual continually change, we think of them as being a self of an in­
dividual and have attachment to that idea. In this way we can 
apply the term "self' as in selflessness (Tib. dakme) to all phe­
nomena. Ignorance is dullness and obscuration of the mind; we 
cannot understand things properly. We need to examine and 
clearly see the nature of things so that we can see what is impure 
is impure, what is impermanent is impermanent, what is suffer­
ing is suffering, and that the absence of a self is the absence of a 
self. If we can analyze phenomena clearly, then we can have the 
correct view, but if we cannot analyze clearly, then we will re­
main in the state of ignorance and fail to understand the Four 
Noble Truths. If we cannot comprehend the Four Noble Truths, 
then we will never be able to eliminate ignorance from our mind. 
First, we need to eliminate the ignorance of attachment to a 
self. We eliminate this ignorance by developing the wisdom of 
egolessness. If we can develop the wisdom of egolessness, then 
we can eliminate the belief in a self. We develop this wisdom by 
analyzing and examining the nature of samsaric phenomena. By 
examining the nature of phenomena and the aggregates, we learn 
31 
S hen tong and Rangtong: Two Views of Emptiness 
that there is no self. That is how we develop the wisdom of ego­
lessness. We need to apply the remedy of removing ignorance, 
the remedy being the wisdom that knows egolessness. 
As long as we do not have the wisdom of egolessness, we 
will not be able to eliminate our attachment to a self. As long as 
we are attached to a self, we will believe the four misconceptions 
and consequently experience an unbroken continuity of samsaric 
suffering. That is why it is essential to develop the wisdom that 
realizes egolessness. We develop the wisdom that realizes ego­
lessness by hearing (or studying), contemplating, and meditating 
on the teachings of the nonexistence of self. 
Great masters have given examples for this process: It is like 
being in a darkened room where a rope lies on the floor. Because 
it is dark, one thinks that the rope is a snake. As a result, one is 
very frightened and suffers. How can one become free from this 
fear and suffering? Remedies such as arming oneself with a 
weapon are of no help. The only thing that will really help is ex­
amining what one sees and thus discovering that what one saw in 
the dark was in fact just a rope. Once one sees that the rope isn't 
a snake, the fear of a snake naturally ceases and all suffering 
ends. If one does not examine the rope and calls friends to help 
kill the snake, this will be of no help. In the same way, if one 
continues believing in the self of an individual and of phenom­
ena, then one experiences the fear and suffering of samsara. As 
long as one does not discover that there is no self, nothing can 
free us from the consequences of misconceptions. Once one re­
alizes egolessness, our samsaric suffering ends. As long as one 
adheres to the belief in a self, no other method or weapon can 
free us from suffering because belief in a self is the cause of all 
suffering. Only the wisdom of realizing egolessness can bring 
freedom from all suffering. 
32 
Developing the Wisdom that Realizes Egolessness 
Questions 
Question: Is this the same emptiness as debating the emptiness 
of a subject and the emptiness of an object when we are talking 
about self and other or is there a difference? I can't quite under­
stand why you can debate emptiness because you can't have a 
subject without an object. So why do you have two schools of 
thought when they are both interdependent?" 
Rinpoche: The Rangtong and Shentong present the same teach­
ings on subject and object. In the Rangtong both subject and ob­
ject are taught to be empty and in the Shentong tradition this is 
also taught. When the Rangtong position states that the subject 
and object are empty, they just teach emptiness and say, "Things 
are unreal, unreal, unreal, unreal ... and things are just empty." 
The Shentong tradition states that things are in truth empty, but 
this isn't just an empty voidness. In that emptiness there is clar­
ity and wisdom, which is Buddha-nature. So, that emptiness has 
an essence of its own. While things are in reality empty, there is 
an essence of clarity and wisdom in the emptiness. 
Question: I am not sure about the object of ignorance. 
Rinpoche: In the description on developing the realization of 
egolessness, the text speaks about the view of "that which is de­
stroyed." This is the belief in a self, viewing the aggregates 
(which can be destroyed) as being a self. The text describes that 
this belief in a self has the quality of clarity; there is no doubt 
that "this is 'me."' Ignorance is dull and full of doubt; it doesn't 
see with clarity. The perception ofthe belief in a self is very clear, 
so it differs from ignorance. The one belief has clarity and the 
other has dullness. The definite and clear perception of a self does 
not give rise to the dull state of ignorance. However, by being 
habituated to the belief in a self, our mind becomes used to these 
mistaken beliefs. Due to the power of that habit of thinking of 
33 
Jhentong and Rangtong: Two Views of Emptiness 
ourselves as being a solid self, ignorance is created; this eventu­
ally develops into disturbing emotions. 
Question: I have a question about the three kinds of suffering, es­
pecially about the suffering of change and the pervasive suffer­
ing. What is the difference between the two? 
Rinpoche: The difference between the suffering of change and 
the all-pervasive suffering is that the suffering of change means 
happiness will naturally change into suffering. For example, if 
someone who earns 500 dollars a month receives a raise of 200 
dollars a month, he feels very happy. If someone else who earns 
700 dollars a month is cut down to 500 dollars a month, he will 
feel very unhappy. Both now receive 500 dollars, but this made 
one person happy, while the other is unhappy because previously 
the second person had earned more each month. Thus, 500 dol­
lars for this individual has become the cause of his suffering. This 
shows the suffering of change. The all-pervasive suffering refers 
to the continuous change going on all the time. 
34 
4 
The Four Seals 
III. THE FOUR SEALS 
In the third part of this text on the view, Jamgon Kongtrul 
describes the process by which one develops the wisdom 
that realizes egolessness. The four seals are preliminaries. 
The word "seal" is used in analogy to the decree of a king, who 
seals a document to prove that it is the word of the ruler. The 
four seals are the signs that they are authentic teachings of the 
Buddha. If any of the four seals are missing, then they are not 
the teachings of the Buddha. These four seals are: (a) What­
ever is composite is impermanent; (b) Everything that is im­
pure is suffering; (c) All phenomena are empty and without a 
self, and (d) Nirvana is peace. 
A. WHATEVER IS COMPOSITE IS IMPERMANENT 
First, if something doesn't exist, then it doesn't exist, but 
whatever does exist is composite and not a single, indivisible 
entity. This is the first seal. All things are made up of various 
ingredients and these ingredients form existing things. There­
fore, all phenomena that exist are composed of various ingre­
dients and as a result are impermanent. Living beings die, 
objects wear out and disintegrate. At this coarse or obvious 
35 
Shentong and Rangtong: Two VieuJs of Emptiness 
level of impermanence, everything changes over time, and this 
is obvious and can be understood by everyone. The subtle level 
of impermanence is the main concern here; it is the momentary 
impermanence of every instant. 
When looking at momentary impermanence on a gross 
level, we can see that a person changes from childhood to 
adulthood. One may think that there is continuity in the change 
that takes place. One may wonder when this change takes place 
and conclude that every year, everybody is different. However, 
a change doesn't automatically take place at a certain point 
each year. One may conclude that every month, everybody is 
different, but the change doesn't automatically take place at a 
certain point in each month either. One may conclude that 
every day or every hour, everybody changes. We follow this 
reasoning down to every single instant in which a change takes 
place, so there is impermanence in every instant. This is the 
subtle level of impermanence. It is easy to see changes that 
take place over the years, but, in fact, changes are taking place 
in every instant. Chandrakirti said that even a solid-looking 
diamond, which is as large as a boulder, changes every single 
instant. 
8. EVERYTHING THAT IS IMPURE IS SUFFERING 
All phenomena entail different kinds of suffering. This is 
the second seal. There are three kinds of suffering: ordinary 
suffering, the suffering of change, and pervasive suffering. 
The first kind of suffering, which is most obvious, includes 
illness, old age, and pain. It is not necessary to contemplate or 
meditate upon ordinary suffering because even animals can 
identify physical suffering for what it is. It need not be ana­
lyzed and logically proved that this suffering is suffering. 
Even though there is happiness, it will eventually change 
and come to an end and be replaced by the second form of suf-
36 
The Four Seals 
fering, which is the suffering of change. Everyone can perceive 
the suffering of change because happiness cannot last; all happi­
ness is going to come to an end and change into suffering. There­
fore everything that arises must fall and everything that joins 
must separate. In this way, everything is bound to decline and 
come to an end. 
The third type of suffering isn't very obvious. Because all 
things in samsara are composite phenomena, made up of differ­
ent things, changing every single instant, samsaric beings expe­
rience this third type of suffering. Whether or not they are 
experiencing happiness or suffering, all living beings experience 
this subtle suffering called the "suffering of the composite." 
C. ALL PHENOMENA ARE EMPTY 
Whatever phenomena we can perceive are empty like water 
bubbles. Although we can hear and see things, nothing has a true 
reality in itself; there is no true self in the individual and no true 
existence of phenomena. In spite ofthe fact that they appear, phe­
nomena have no substantial or true reality of their own. Thus it 
is said that all phenomena are empty and have no self. 
D. NIRVANA IS PEACE 
The fourth seal is nirvana or peace. Since there is no self of 
the individual or of phenomena, it is taught that all phenomena 
are empty and devoid of a true existence. If we realize the ab­
sence of a self or egolessness of all things, we will eliminate the 
four incorrect views and consequently become free from sam­
sara. We will then attain nirvana. But while in our world of sam­
sara, we do not find any true happiness or peace, but experience 
suffering. Having realized the absence of a self, having become 
free from samsara and having attained the state ofliberation, will 
result in having attained the supreme happiness of the ultimate 
goal, which is nirvana, a state of peace. 
37 
Shentong and Rangtong: Two Views of Emptiness 
By realizing the first two seals (the composite is imperma­
nent and all which is polluted is suffering) we gain non-at­
tachment to the world and to samsara and tum our mind 
towards liberation. We seek refuge and place our hopes in the 
Buddha and in his teachings. Through the practice of medita­
tion and the realization of the third seal (that phenomena are 
without a self and empty) we are liberated from samsara. 
Once we understand the first three seals, we attain true hap­
piness and peace, which is only found in nirvana. No true hap­
piness and peace can be found in the world of samsara because 
its nature is suffering. This is the basis of the Buddha's teach­
ings; therefore these four points are called .. the seals of the 
Buddha's teachings." 
38 
5 
How to Abandon the Two Extremes 
IV. NOT FALLING INTO THE TWO EXTREMES 
There are seven sections in Jamgon Kongtrul 's text related 
to the explanation on the view of the Middle-way school. 
This fourth section deals with how we follow the path that 
keeps us from falling into the two extremes. The Middle-way is 
Madhyamaka in Sanskrit which means that one is "going directly 
down the middle," straying neither to the left nor to the right. In 
terms of the view of realizing the true nature of phenomena, the 
middle path means not straying into what is called "the view of 
etemalism" or straying into what is called "the view of ni­
hilism."12 By avoiding these two extremes, we can go down the 
Middle-way to reach the realization of the actual nature of phe­
nomena. 
We should be able to see the true nature of phenomena in 
meditation by not straying into either of the two extremes, which 
can be avoided by having a correct understanding of conventional 
and ultimate truth. Conventional truth refers to the delusory ap­
pearances that we experience. Even though delusory, our con­
duct should accord with the conventional level ofthe way things 
appear. 
39 
Shentong and &ngtong: Two Views of Emptiness 
The Buddha turned the wheel of the dharma three times. 
First, he presented the teachings of the Four Noble Truths; sec­
ond, he presented the teachings on emptiness; third, he presented 
the teachings on the true nature of the mind, the teachings on 
Buddha-nature. After the Buddha passed away, the Indian mas­
ters and scholars presented the Buddha's teachings in a defini­
tive manner and thus four Buddhist traditions developed in India: 
the tradition of the Great Exposition (Skt. Vaibhashika), the 
Sutra-school (Skt. Sautrantika) the Mind-only (Skt. Chittama­
tra), and the Middle-way (Skt. Madhyamaka) school. 
The Buddha gave teachings in a particular order for a reason. 
He began with teachings on meritorious conduct, which obvi­
ously involves assuming there is a self. In the second turning he 
gave the teachings on emptiness to turn people away from the 
belief in a self. In the third turning, he gave teachings on Buddha­
nature that taught the correct view of emptiness. 
A. THE Two EXTREMES IN THE FOUR TRADITIONS 
l. THE GREAT EXPOSITION (VAIBHASHIKA) TRADITION 
First the Buddha taught the Foundation vehicle on how to 
turn away from unvirtuous actions. This was taught in terms of 
the conventional level of existence. Had the Buddha first taught 
about emptiness, his students would not have turned away from 
negative actions because they would have heard that nothing ex­
ists so why make an effort to do good. Instead, the Buddha taught 
that things do exist: the mind exists, the body exists, previous 
lives exist, future lives exist, that virtuous actions lead to good 
karma, that negative actions result in bad karma, that there is a 
self, and there are others. He was teaching on the reality of all ap­
pearances. When we believe all these things are real, we realize 
that we should avoid negative actions because they create suf­
fering and that we should practice positive actions because they 
bring about merit. So, first the Buddha's teachings assumed that 
40 
Hozv to Abandon the T1vo Extremes 
all appearances do exist and are real. The tradition of the Sar­
vastivadins arose from these teachings; and they believed that all 
phenomena do actually exist; much like the Great Exposition 
(Skt. Vaibhashika) school. 
There is a difference between the way things appear and the 
way things truly are. Even though there is a difference between 
apparent nature and true nature, the first teaching emphasizes the 
apparent nature of phenomena and so, for example, the teachings 
affirmed that there is such a thing as killing and terrible conse­
quences for doing this act. Because things appear to exist, the 
first set of teachings accepts things as they appear. Thus, when we 
kill, we certainly harm someone, and consequently this will harm 
us through the law of karma. There are negative actions which 
cause negative results and there are good actions, which cause 
good results. This is the reason why we should do what is bene­
ficial to others which in tum will bring a good consequence to 
ourselves, and this is the reason why we should not do harmful 
actions to others which will bring a bad consequence to our­
selves. If we are able to do good actions and avoid bad actions, 
then we will attain merit. If we do not do positive actions and do 
not avoid negative actions, then we will harm ourselves. 
From the viewpoint of the apparent nature of things the Great 
Exposition tradition asserts the existence of phenomena and the 
existence of cause and effect, thus presenting the teachings of the 
different kinds of negative actions and their results and the dif­
ferent kinds of positive actions and their results. 
2. THE SUTRA-SCHOOL (SAUTRANTIKA) TRADITION 
The second tradition is the Sautrantikas, which means "the 
followers of the sutras." This school as well as the Great Expo­
sition followers are members of the Foundation vehicle. The 
Sutra-school teaches that matter does exist (for example, there is 
a body, there is sound from speech, etc.), but concepts created by 
the mind do not have any existence. They believe, for example, 
41 
.Shentong and Rangtong: Two Views of Emptiness 
that the body does exist from the crown of the head to the soles 
of the feet. The actions accomplished by the body and speech do 
have their results. But, what we call "the mind" (or "me") has no 
existence. If asked, "Where is the body?" a Sutra-school follower 
would point to it and reply, "That is my body which exists." They 
would not say the same for the self because it cannot be pointed 
to; it is merely a concept of the mind. Therefore, the self has no 
existence. This is how the Sutra-school presents their teachings 
using this viewpoint to avoid the two extreme views of nihilism 
and eternalism. 
The first two traditions, then, are the Great Exposition and 
the Sutra-school. Although the Sutra-school teaches the ego less­
ness of the individual, it does not teach the egolessness of phe­
nomena. These two schools of the Great Exposition and 
Sutra-school are principally Foundation schools. The other two 
traditions, the Mind-only school and the Middle-way schools are 
Mahayana schools. 
3. THE MIND-ONLY (CHITTAMATRA) TRADITION 
The Mind-only (Skt. Chittamatra) followers teach that all ex­
ternal appearances, including one's own body, are created by and 
are part of the mind. Objects do appear and we do perceive them, 
but none of the things that appear have any external existence; 
they all arise within the mind itself. How can this be? They give 
the example ofwhen we are asleep and we dream of a mountain, 
a house, animals, people, friends, enemies, and so forth, we see 
various things exactly as we would see them while awake. But, 
none of these things actually exist; they are all appearances aris­
ing from our mind. In the same way, all appearances that we nor­
mally perceive while awake also arise in the mind. They are 
nothing else but mind. This is why this tradition is called "Chit­
tamatra," which in Sanskrit means "mind-only," that is, every­
thing is "only" mind. 
First, there are tendencies or latencies (Tib. bag chag)13 that 
are created in the mind. If the mind is habituated to something 
42 
How to Abandon the Two Extremes 
that is positive, gradually the mind gets better and better and 
one's thoughts become more and more virtuous. If, on the other 
hand, the mind becomes habituated to something that is nega­
tive, gradually the mind gets worse and worse and one's thoughts 
become more and more unvirtuous. For example, slight anger 
may arise within us. If we take control of that anger and get rid 
of it, then it will not remain in our mind as a latency. If, on the 
other hand, we do not take control ofthat anger, it will become 
stronger and stronger. In the beginning we are stronger than the 
anger, but if we don't control it, the anger becomes stronger and 
we cannot get rid of it. In this process, what the mind allows to 
become a habitual pattern becomes more and more powerful. 
This applies as well to positive emotions such as love, compas­
sion, and the wish to benefit others. These thoughts can be small 
in the beginning, but if we cultivate them and habituate ourselves 
to them, they will increase and become more and more powerful. 
The mind is therefore said to be dependent upon these laten­
cies within it. In the Mind-only view, this mind is said to really 
exist, whereas appearances both in the outer world and in the 
mind itself are "imaginary," or, we could say, are creations of the 
mind or delusions. 
The followers of the Mind-only school describe rebirth in 
hell, for example, through the same process; it occurs due to the 
power of anger. By becoming habituated to anger, this anger in­
creases so much that what you experience or see is people being 
harmed and killed and wishing to harm you. The mind becomes 
accustomed to this malevolence and intention to harm which 
therefore grows stronger and stronger. The teachings say that 
through the power of anger the individual will be reborn in the 
hell realms. Due to the strong tendency created in mind that re­
sulted from cultivating anger, after death one experiences a re­
birth where one sees people being burned in fire and chopped up 
and all other kinds of tortures. In the same way, during daily life, 
if we look at people maliciously and wish to harm them, we ha­
bituate ourselves to this malice within which grows quite pow­
erful. Then we will have disturbing dreams and nightmares while 
asleep at night and will see unpleasant things. If, on the other 
43 
Shentong and Rangtong: Two Views of Emptiness 
hand, we develop a peaceful state of mind that loves and wishes 
to help others during the day, we will have pleasant dreams and 
see nice things while we sleep at night. In the same way, through 
developing love, compassion, and the wish to help others 
throughout our lifetime, the power of that habituation will also in­
fluence what we experience after death and in the next life. In­
stead of taking rebirth in hell, we can have rebirth in a pure realm. 
4. THE MIDDLE-WAY (MADHYAMAKA) TRADITION 
The fourth tradition, which is the highest of the traditions, is 
the Middle-way (Skt. Madhyamaka). Both Rangtong and Shen­
tong are branches of the Middle-way school. The Middle-way 
tradition teaches that we need to pay attention to both the view of 
emptiness and also be concerned about our conduct. The conduct 
relates to our functioning on the conventional level of reality. The 
conventional truth is that everything is not a delusion or without 
any true existence. While the ultimate truth states that everything 
is a delusion, this doesn't mean that conventional truth is false. 
The conventional truth is a truth. It is called a "conventional 
truth," because if one plants a seed, it is not going to wither but 
will grow into a flower or fruit when given compost, watered reg­
ularly, and nourished by the sun. 
In the same way, a good action will be the cause for a good 
result and a bad action will be the cause for a bad result. There­
fore, in the context of conventional truth, one's conduct must ac­
cord with the laws of cause and effect; one should avoid what is 
negative and try to adopt all the positive qualities in one's con­
duct. In the Mahayana tradition, good conduct means practicing 
the six perfections (generosity, patience, discipline, enthusiastic 
effort, meditation, and wisdom). By practicing the six perfec­
tions, one will gain a good result due to the law of conventional 
truth. 
The ultimate truth is realizing the truth of emptiness; it means 
recognizing that all appearances are without any reality and are 
merely illusory. Realization ofthe emptiness of phenomena will 
eliminate one's suffering and fear of samsara. 
44 
How to Abandon the Two Extremes 
Chart 1 The Four Major Schools 
The Great Exposition School 
(Skt. Vaibhashika) 
I. A Foundation school relying on the sutras with goal 
of self-liberation. 
2. They believe that outer phenomena are real and solid 
and made up of indestructible atoms. 
3. They believe that there is no solid self. 
4. They believe that time is made up of irreducible 
small units. 
5. Works mostly on the conventional level, believing 
in the existence of karma (cause and effect), and in 
conducting oneself by engaging only in positive 
actions. 
6. They believe that mind is made up of six consciousnesses 
(the five sensory consciousnesses and the mental con­
sciousness) 
7. One of principle works is Vasubandhu's Abhidharma­
kosha 
The Sutra-school 
(Skt. Sautrantika) 
I. A Foundation school with the goal of self-liberation. 
2. They believe that external phenomena, space, and time 
exist, but that the self ( .. mind" or .. me") does not exist. 
3. Works mostly on the conventional level and on realizing 
the egolessness of self. 
4. They believe that mind is made up of six consciousnesses. 
5. They believe in taking the sutras literally, thus the name. 
45 
S hen tong and Rangtong: Two Views of Emptiness 
Chart 1 (continued) 
The Mind-only School 
(Skt. Chittamatra) 
I. A Mahayana school with goal of liberating all sentient 
beings. 
2. They believe that all external phenomena as well as the body 
do not inherently exist but are created by the mind. 
3. They believe that the mind is real, while phenomena are cre­
ated by mind. 
4. They believe that the mind is made up of six conscious­
nesses plus the seventh afflicted consciousness and the 
eighth alaya consciousness. 
5. Believe that there are karmic latencies that enter the eighth 
consciousness that influence behavior. 
6. They follow Asanga as basis of their theory 
The Middle-way School 
(Skt. Madhyamaka) 
I. A Mahayana school with goal of liberating all sentient 
beings, not just oneself. 
2. They believe that both internal phenomena and all 
external phenomena are empty. 
3. They believe that on the conventional level positive and 
negative actions lead to positive and negative karma. 
4. This school was divided in Tibet into two sub-schools: the 
Rangtong and Shentong subschools. These are described in 
more detail on page 68. 
46 
6 
The Middle-way School 
The fourth point on dealing with the two extremes is di­
vided into two parts. The first part, given in the previous 
chapter, discussed how the four traditions avoid falling 
into the error of the two extremes. The second part of the fourth 
point then focuses on the Middle-way school. This section on the 
Middle-way School is divided into three parts with the first sub­
section defining emptiness. 
IV. NOT FALLING INTO THE TWO EXTREMES 
B. THE MIDDLE-WAY SCHOOL 
1. THE MAIN CHARACTERISTIC OF THE MIDDLE-WAY 
Jamgon Kongtrul in the root text says, "The object of its view 
is emptiness." What is meant by emptiness? How does one iden­
tify the emptiness that the Middle-way teaches? What is it that is 
empty? What are phenomena empty of? This emptiness relates to 
the egolessness of the individual and the egolessness of phe­
nomena. The self is the thought "I" and "me," which is empty; 
this is called the egolessness or selflessness of self. The ego less­
ness of phenomena is the belief that outside phenomena are de­
void of that inherent self also. This is what is meant by emptiness. 
It is being empty of the self or ego of the individual and the self 
47 
Shentong and Rangtong: Two Views of Emptiness 
or ego of phenomena. 
That was the first part of this part explaining the Middle-way 
tradition. The other two subsections are an explanation of the dif­
ference between the Rangtong philosophy and the Shentong phi­
losophy. 
2. THE RANGTONG TRADITION OF THE MIDDLE-WAY 
The Rangtong tradition teaches that all phenomena are with­
out any reality. The way the Buddha taught emptiness in the su­
tras was by presenting sixteen different kinds of emptiness. Rang 
means "self' and tong means "empty," i.e. phenomena are empty 
or devoid of an own nature, so all things are devoid of them­
selves. Relative phenomena have no true inherent reality; they 
are devoid of a nature of their own, of a self-nature. That is the 
teaching of emptiness taught by the Rangtong school. 
In Rangtong, one can examine the nature of phenomena and 
gain knowledge of emptiness ofphenomena using intellectual ar­
guments. When it comes to meditation, one needs the Shentong 
approach because the view of emptiness alone leads to an un­
comfortable meditation. One can think, "Am I supposed to see 
everything as non-existent?" Then the meditation can become 
awkward. In terms of meditation practice, the Shentong is the 
union of the sutra and tantra approach and is therefore very im­
portant; it is without the thought of"just" being emptiness. 
a. SIXTEEN EMPTINESSES 
Jamgon Kongtrul next lists the sixteen emptinesses which 
are: 
I. External emptiness. The first of the sixteen emptinesses is 
called "external emptiness." It refers to all external appearances, 
such as mountains, forests, houses and everything that we see as 
external objects. We perceive external things through our senses 
and through our sensory consciousnesses. For example, the eye 
48 
The Middle-wq_y School 
has the visual consciousness which perceives a visual image. This 
visual image is an external phenomenon. These external phe­
nomena of visual forms have no true reality. They are therefore 
empty. Similarly, the aural consciousness of the ear perceives 
sounds, which have no true reality either. This applies to the con­
sciousness of the nose, the tongue, and physical body which per­
ceive smells, tastes, and tactile objects respectively. The mental 
consciousness experiences a vast range of mental phenomena. 
These are the six external objects perceived by the six inner con­
sciousnesses. All these outer objects that are perceived are with­
out any reality and are called "external emptiness." 
When we hear that all external phenomena have no reality 
and that their nature is emptiness, it is difficult to believe this at 
first because we think, "Well, I can see all these things. There are 
mountains, rivers, forests, houses and so many things that I can 
perceive. They do exist." But, in fact, if we examine carefully, we 
discover that they have no inherent or real existence. For exam­
ple, I am holding a two-inch and a four-inch stick of incense; the 
four-inch one is long and the two-inch one is short. We think, 
"There is no mistake in that. We can't deny that the one is long 
and the other is short." But, this thought is simply a fabrication 
or creation of the mind because by placing the "long" stick next 
to six-inch stick of incense, the stick that was previously "long" 
becomes the shorter one and this new one becomes the "long" 
one. Phenomena are empty of being "long" or "short"; there is 
simply no long and short as such. It is the same for the other 
things created by the mind. There is no big or small, beautiful or 
ugly, good or bad. All these thoughts are merely creations of the 
mind; they have no reality. This is what is called "external empti­
ness." 
One might accept this and think, "There is no reality to the 
ideas of long and short, but nonetheless, things do exist." One 
has a general impression that there are these things and that they 
do have an existence. But, in fact, we can examine them and see 
that this is not so; things do not have any real existence of their 
49 
Shentong and Rangtong: Two Views of Emptiness 
own. By examining phenomena, we find that phenomena are nei­
ther unitary nor multiple; they are neither one thing nor many 
things. For example, when we see a hand, we think, "This is a 
hand." If we ask anybody else, they will agree, "Yes, that is a 
hand." But, then if we point to the thumb and ask if it is a hand, 
the reply will be, "No, it's a thumb." Further, if we point to the 
index finger and ask whether it is a hand, the reply will be, "No, 
it's an index-finger." If we point to the middle finger, the ring-fin­
ger, the skin, the flesh, the bones and so on and ask, "Is this the 
hand?" The answer is "No." Where then is the hand? We cannot 
point to any spot and define it as "the hand" and we cannot find 
what is called "hand" by investigating the parts of the hand either. 
In fact, the hand is a collection of many different components 
and there is no such thing as a "hand" that exists of itself. It is a 
creation of the mind. 
The same is true with a house. We can go through all parts of 
a house and discover that the pillar is not the house; the beams are 
not the house, and so on. There is no "house." Just as a house has 
no existence, similarly mountains don't exist, people don't exist, 
etc. Nothing will ever be found to truly exist. This is what is 
meant by "external emptiness." 
2. Internal emptiness. The second of the sixteen emptinesses is 
internal emptiness. When objects such as a hand are seen, we do 
so with the visual consciousness. There is the perception of the 
hand in the visual consciousness. If a hand does not exist, then the 
visual consciousness that perceives the hand cannot have any ex­
istence either. This applies to all sensory consciousnesses. No 
consciousness has a reality of its own because the object of the 
consciousness is empty. This is what is meant by "internal empti­
ness." 
3. External and internal emptiness. The third emptiness is exter­
nal and internal emptiness. If the external objects and the per­
ceiving consciousnesses have no existence, then how can 
50 
The Middle-wqy School 
perceptions take place? How is it possible to see something if 
there is no visual consciousness perceiving it? The same is true 
for hearing and so on. This process of the connection between 
the object and the consciousness is called "external and internal 
emptiness." It is the lack ofreality ofthe process of seeing, hear­
ing, and so on. 
4. Emptiness of emptiness. We have established the emptiness of 
external phenomena the inner consciousnesses and the connec­
tion between external phenomena, and the inner consciousnesses. 
Therefore, we might conclude, "Well, then emptiness exists." In 
fact, this emptiness does not exist. This emptiness itself has no 
real existence of its own. This is the fourth emptiness, which is 
called "the emptiness of emptiness." 
5. Great emptiness. The fifth kind of emptiness is called "the 
great emptiness" or "the vast emptiness." When we think of di­
rections (north, south, east, and west), we think of these direc­
tions as being something real. We think they have reality and that 
there is a north, east, south, and west. But, in fact, they are merely 
creations of the mind. Here in England we can think that we are 
presently in the west, but in terms of America we are in the east. 
Therefore, directions are simply mental creations and are devoid 
of any reality. This is the great emptiness. 
6. Emptiness of the ultimate. The sixth is called "the emptiness of 
the ultimate." So far we have shown that all relative phenomena 
are empty. If we try to prove that the ultimate exists, it cannot be 
done. This is the emptiness of the ultimate. 
7. Emptiness of the composite. The seventh emptiness is the 
emptiness of the composite. All external and internal phenom­
ena (everything that appears) have no reality. So all composites 
of these phenomena are also without reality. This lack of reality 
is the emptiness of the composite. 
51 
Shentong and Rangtong: Two Views of Emptiness 
8. Emptiness of the non-composite. If composites have no reality, 
then the non-composite or the absence of things has no reality 
either. That is the emptiness of the non-composite, which is the 
eighth emptiness. 
9. Emptiness of the transcendence of extremes. The two extremes 
are the extremes of eternal ism and nihilism. Both eternal ism and 
nihilism are devoid of any reality. Therefore, the transcendence 
ofthese two extremes is also devoid of any reality. Transcending 
etemalism and nihilism doesn't transcend emptiness. So this is 
the emptiness of the transcendence of extremes. 
I 0. Emptiness of phenomena which is beginning less and endless. 
The tenth emptiness is the emptiness of phenomena which have 
no beginning and no end. The very ideas "beginning" and "end" 
have no reality. For instance, we could say that the middle of the 
night is the end of the day or we could say that it is the beginning 
of the day. There is no actual reality to the terms "beginning" and 
"end." Also, it is said that samsara is without a beginning and 
without an end. Yet samsara is without any true reality of its own. 
Therefore, phenomena which have no beginning or end are 
empty also. 
11. Emptiness of that which is not discarded. The eleventh empti­
ness is the emptiness of that which is not eliminated or cast aside. 
We wish to eliminate samsara and all ofthe faults ofsamsara and 
as a result attain liberation or nirvana. Samsara and all its faults 
have no reality; therefore, after we have discarded this, the re­
sult which is nirvana or liberation also has no reality either and 
is empty. 
12. Emptiness of nature. The twelfth emptiness is the emptiness 
of essence. We might think that there is something that is real in 
all phenomena and that it is that they have a nature or essence. 
52 
The Middle-wqy School 
There is no reality to that nature. That is the emptiness of nature. 
13. Emptiness of all dharmas (phenomena). The thirteenth empti­
ness is that everything (every phenomenon) is empty. Therefore, 
there is the emptiness of all phenomena. 
14. Emptiness of specific characteristics. Things have their own 
natural characteristics, but these characteristics have no reality 
either. 
15. Emptiness of non-perception. Non-perception refers to the 
state in which nothing is being perceived or experienced. That, 
too, has no reality. That is the emptiness of non-perception. 
16. Emptiness of the essence of the non-existence of things. The 
sixteenth emptiness is the emptiness of the absence of phenom­
ena. It has been established that phenomena are empty, so the ab­
sence of phenomena, i.e., voidness or a complete blankness must 
also be empty. 
These sixteen emptinesses were taught by the Buddha in the 
Prajnaparamita sutra ("The Perfection of Wisdom Sutra") in 
order to establish that all conventional phenomena which arise 
through interdependent origination 14 have no reality of their own, 
and are empty of any nature oftheir own. This is the view of the 
Rangtong tradition, which teaches that all things are empty of 
themselves. 
b. SUMMARY OF THE fOUR EMPTINESSES 
These aspects of emptiness are then summarized into four 
basic types: (I) The emptiness of phenomena, (2) the emptiness 
ofthe non-existence of phenomena, (3) the emptiness ofthe na­
ture of phenomena, and (4) the emptiness of the phenomena 
which is other. 
53 
Shentong and Rangtong: Two Views of Emptiness 
We have examined the importance of the two kinds of empti­
ness in relation to the Middle-way school. Up to now we have 
used the Rangtong analysis of emptiness. Next we will examine 
emptiness from the Shentong view which is slightly different 
from the Rangtong view. 
3. THE SHENTONG TRADITION OF THE MIDDLE-WAY SCHOOL 
Many texts discuss topics such as emptiness in terms of the 
view, meditation, and conduct. What is being emphasized in this 
chapter is in relation to the view. 
In the previous section we had been looking into the impor­
tance of the egolessness of persons and the egolessness of phe­
nomena according to the Rangtong tradition. Now we will 
examine emptiness from the point of view of the Shentong tra­
dition which presents the list of emptinesses in a way slightly dif­
ferent from the Rangtong tradition. Shen means "other" and tong 
means "empty, i.e. devoid of that which is other," with "other" 
being the impurities. The essence of emptiness in the Shentong 
is clarity (and not a thing or voidness). That is the teaching of 
emptiness taught by the Shentong. 
The Importance of Good Conduct15 
Many people study and practice the dharma diligently, but 
they do not achieve any positive results. Many lamas are unhappy 
that they have not been able to engender realization in their 
pupils; the pupils are also unhappy, thinking, "I haven't been able 
to gain realization." The reason for this is that many lamas em­
phasize view and meditation but do not emphasize conduct. The 
lamas pass this attitude on to their pupils, who also see view and 
meditation as important and conduct as not so important. When 
these lamas teach the accumulation ofwisdom and the accumu­
lation of merit, the accumulation of wisdom is emphasized and 
given much attention, while the accumulation of merit is regarded 
54 
The Middle-Wf!Y School 
as insignificant. This is the reason why results in meditation are 
not achieved. 
For example, three years ago I went to South America and 
my interpreter gave me advice on what I should teach. He said, 
"There are three subjects that you can teach. People do not like 
to hear about karma, about the suffering oflower existences, nor 
about samsara; is it better not to mention these things. People 
will not object to the topic of love, compassion, and bodhichitta, 
but there is nothing special about it; it is okay as a subject. A third 
possible subject is emptiness and egolessness. People really like 
that and will be astonished and surprised by the topic. Even 
though many people do not understand it, they still like it be­
cause they think it is really profound." I gave the talk on empti­
ness and egolessness and the next day somebody remarked, "I 
didn't sleep all night because I was wondering what emptiness 
is." It is important to have teachings on conduct and the view. If 
one doesn't have the practice of proper conduct, then the prac­
tice of dharma will not bring a beneficial result. 
I am teaching the view in this book, but we should not forget 
about the practice of conduct. We should keep the practice of 
good physical actions and good speech in mind from day to day 
and from month to month, and not forget them throughout our 
life. We should practice good actions of the body, use good 
speech, and use our possessions to accumulate good actions. We 
should avoid negative actions with our body and speech and our 
resources. If we keep that in mind all the time and put it into prac­
tice, we will accumulate merit. If it is possible to accumulate 
merit in this way, then it will be impossible not to achieve bene­
ficial results when it comes to meditation practice and learning 
about the view. 
We should remember good conduct at all times; whether we 
are meditating, working, or doing something else. When we are 
learning, contemplating, and meditating, we should always think 
of accumulating merit through our actions. We should never ig­
nore the accumulation of positive karma with our actions and 
55 
Shentong and R.angtong: Two Views of Emptiness 
speech and never regard these positive actions as being unim­
portant. We should always try to avoid negative actions and re­
member the necessity of accumulating merit. This will make our 
practice fruitful. 
a. THE THREE NATURES 
What is another difference between the Rangtong and the 
Shentong view? One major view is that in the Shentong view 
phenomena are described in terms of three characteristics or na­
tures: The imaginary nature (Skt. pankalpita), the dependent na­
ture (Skt. paratantra), and the completely perfect nature (Skt. 
parinishpanna).16 
l. The imaginary nature. The first characteristic of phenomena is 
called "the imaginary" phenomena. This means that objects are 
merely a result of the attachment of the mind. The mind thinks, 
"This is what this is; this is real." But, what the mind perceives 
as "real" is purely a fabrication of the mind. 
2. The dependent nature. Although appearances are delusory in 
nature, these appearances still rise in the mind. These appear­
ances do actually occur to the mind. Even though these appear­
ances are empty, they arise in the mind due to the power of the 
latencies that were created in a previous lifetime, as described in 
the Mind-only school. These appearances arise dependent on 
these latencies or tendencies. Although these appearances arise, 
they have no reality and their essence is empty. The second char­
acteristic of mind is that experience, the arising of appearances to 
the mind, called "the dependent." Attachment to those appear­
ances (thinking that they are real) is the characteristic of "the 
imaginary" or "mentally fabricated." 
3. The completely perfect nature. The first characteristic ofphe-
56 
The Middle-1vqy School 
nomena is the imaginary phenomena. The second is dependent 
appearances, and the third is the completely perfect nature. The 
first two (the mentally fabricated and the dependent arising of 
appearances) are both empty. This emptiness is the third charac­
teristic, called the "complete perfection" or the "dharmadhatu" 
(the expanse of phenomena). Dhatu or "expanse" is like space, 
where one can move around in any direction without encounter­
ing any obstacles. The dharmadhatu (the nature of phenomena, 
where "dharma" means "phenomena") is the expanse in which all 
qualities or appearances can arise and develop; it is like the foun­
dation for all phenomena. Although the dharmadhatu is likened 
to space, it is not like "dead space," which is only a vacuum. 
Inanimate or physical space means that it is without mind. The 
dharmadhatu, on the other hand, is expanse that has a mind, 
which thinks, and in which all qualities of the mind can develop. 
It is the nature of phenomena. There are conceptual fabrications, 
the dependent characteristics (the arising of appearances) of phe­
nomena, and the true nature (dharmadhatu) ofphenomena. Here 
"dharma" means that all things are able to change, to develop, 
and to progress. Here "expanse" means it is like a container out 
of which things can manifest. 
Dharmadhatu is also called parinishpanna in Sanskrit which 
means "the state of complete perfection." Complete perfection 
is the source of all positive qualities, which can only arise from 
the dharmadhatu. Complete perfection also is not like empty 
space, devoid of mind. Some great masters call it "the supreme 
emptiness which has all aspects," because everything (good and 
bad) can arise in it. Where do ordinary beings come from? They 
arise from the emptiness that contains all aspects. Therefore, 
everything can arise from the true nature of phenomena, from 
dharmadhatu. The body of a Buddha, the pure realms, all quali­
ties of Buddhahood can manifest from this perfection, which is 
the nature of all phenomena. 
Dharmadhatu also has wisdom, clarity, and knowing, so it is 
57 
Shentong and Rangtong: Two Vie1vs if Emptiness 
called "the union of space and wisdom." There is the expanse of 
space in which everything can flourish and there is also the pres­
ence of wisdom. Space here does not refer to physical space, but 
to mental space, which has wisdom and positive qualities. The 
dharmadhatu is the source of all qualities and wisdom; every­
thing arises from the true nature of phenomena. 
The Rangtong tradition teaches that all phenomena of con­
ventional truth arise due to interdependent origination and have 
no reality of their own, so they are devoid of a nature of their 
own. The difference between the Rangtong and Shentong view­
points is that in the Shentong view there is a discussion of the 
conceptual fabrications and the state of dependence, which form 
delusory or impure appearances. Conceptual fabrications and de­
pendence are empty of their own nature, as is emphasized by the 
Rangtong, but they are separate and distinct from the basic state 
of complete perfection. The state of complete perfection is "de­
void of other," with "other" being conceptual fabrications and 
interdependence-the impure and delusory appearances that 
anse. 
The Shentong tradition affirms that the state of perfection is 
the union of wisdom and space, which is distinct from the illusory 
appearances of mental fabrications and interdependence. The 
state of complete perfection is devoid of those impurities, i.e. the 
impurities which are "other" than complete perfection. Thus this 
tradition is called "Shentong" ("devoid of everything other than 
itself'). 
b. THE FOURTEEN EMPTINESSES 
The Shentong tradition presents an emptiness slightly differ­
ent from the Rangtong presentation of the sixteen emptinesses. 
First, a group of fourteen and then a group of two emptinesses are 
presented in the Shentong teachings. The fourteen emptinesses 
are (I) Internal emptiness; (2) External emptiness; (3) Internal 
and external emptiness; (4) Great emptiness; (5) Emptiness of 
58 
The Middle-wcry School 
emptiness; ( 6) Emptiness of the ultimate; (7) Emptiness of the 
composite; (8) Emptiness of the non-composite; (9) Emptiness of 
the transcendence of extremes; ( 1 0) Emptiness of that which is 
beginningless and endless; ( 11) Emptiness of that which is not 
eliminated; (12) the Emptiness of nature;(l3) the Emptiness of 
characteristics; and ( 14) the Emptiness of all dharmas (qualities). 
These are the first fourteen emptinesses presented in the previous 
Rangtong section. 
The first six emptinesses relate to conventional and ultimate 
phenomena, with the first four emptinesses being concerned with 
conventional phenomena and the fifth and sixth emptinesses 
being concerned with ultimate phenomena. 
Emptiness of Conventional Phenomena 
1. Internal emptiness. As described before, internal emptiness 
pertains to the internal sensory consciousnesses that experience 
perceptions such as thoughts and dreams. They are without any 
reality of their own and are thus empty. 
2. External emptiness refers to the emptiness of the objects that 
are experienced by the sensory consciousnesses. 
3. Internal and external emptiness refers to the physical basis in 
which perceptions take place (the body, skin, sensory organs, 
etc.). This is referred to as outward and inner emptiness. Sensory 
perception takes place within this basis. The physical location of 
sensory perception has no reality of its own. 
There isn't much difference between the Rangtong and Shen­
tong explanation of this third emptiness; they are about the same. 
In the Rangtong explanation, it is the physical bases of the sen­
sory faculties, which are concealed. You have the external ap­
pearances that are perceived; they are "external emptiness." You 
have the internal consciousnesses that are empty and are "inter­
nal emptiness." Then there is the subtle physical basis for the sen-
59 
Shentong and Rangtong: Two Views of Emptiness 
sory organ to function. That subtle basis is empty and is called 
"external and internal emptiness." In the Shentong tradition it is 
called "the concealed or hidden part related to the outer and inner 
phenomenon" i.e. the physical basis for the sensory faculty. It is 
the third emptiness, because it is neither included in external phe­
nomena nor in internal consciousnesses; it is in-between. There­
fore, there is the emptiness for the bases for the sensory faculties; 
their emptiness is external and internal emptiness. 
4. Great emptiness concerns the external world, the outer phe­
nomena which appear to be outside us, but are actually located in 
our inner consciousnesses. This also is empty. 
Emptiness of Ultimate Phenomena 
5. Emptiness of emptiness. The emptiness of emptiness is taught 
to eliminate attachment to emptiness as being solid and real. It 
emphasizes the expanse of emptiness. 
6. Emptiness of the ultimate. On the ultimate level, the true na­
ture of phenomena is luminous clarity. The emptiness of the ul­
timate nature is taught in order to prevent attachment to luminous 
clarity as having a solid reality of its own. It emphasizes the ex­
panse of clarity. 
The next eight emptinesses are concerned with specific phe­
nomena that have no reality or true nature of their own. The first 
four of the eight emptinesses have to do with the practices of ac­
cumulating merit, accumulating wisdom, avoiding the extremes 
of existence and nonexistence, and working for the benefit of all 
sentient beings. 
Emptiness of Practices on the Path 
7. & 8. Emptiness of the composite and Emptiness of the non­
composite. A bodhisattva practices developing what is compos-
60 
The Middle-wqy School 
ite in nature and this refers to the accumulation of merit. It is 
composite because it is the accumulation of many different things 
making it a composite. What is non-composite in nature refers 
to the accumulation of wisdom which isn't a composite of many 
things. But the bodhisattva isn't attached to either of them as hav­
ing a true nature or being real. Therefore, it is taught that the 
emptiness of the composite and non-composite do not have any 
true existence. 
9. & 10. Emptiness of the transcendence of extremes and Empti­
ness of that which is beginningless and endless. When we prac­
tice meditation in the space of the dharmadhatu which is beyond 
the extreme of existence and non-existence, we should not think 
of it as something that truly exists. There is no object of our prac­
tice of meditation that has a reality of its own. To prevent that at­
tachment, there is the teaching of the dharmadhatu, emptiness 
which is beyond. This practice is done for our own benefit. The 
next emptiness is concerned with something that benefits others, 
the emptiness of that which is beginningless and endless. 17 This 
refers to sentient beings, who are beginningless and endless. Bod­
hisattvas must work for the benefit of all sentient beings, but in 
doing so, bodhisattvas must not become attached to the practice 
of helping all sentient beings as having a true existence in itself. 
Therefore, there are the two kinds of emptinesses in relation to 
these two kinds of practices: avoiding the two extremes of exis­
tence and nonexistence and the practice of working to benefit all 
beings. In order to not become attached to the existence of or the 
nonexistence of objects as real (which gives rise to delusory ap­
pearances), these two emptinesses are taught. 
In summary, four types of emptiness have just been dis­
cussed: (I) the emptiness of the composite and (2) the emptiness 
of the non-composite, (3) the emptiness of that which is begin­
ningless and endless, and (4) the emptiness ofthat which is be­
yond extremes. These four emptinesses relate to the path and are 
applicable to both the Foundation vehicle and the Mahayana ve-
61 
Shentong and Rangtong: Two Views of Emptiness 
hicle of practice. 
Emptinesses Specific to the Mahayana 
These next four emptinesses are specific to the Mahayana, 
starting with the emptiness of that which is not discarded. 
II. Emptiness of that which is not discarded. When we attain the 
state ofBuddhahood, we have gathered the accumulation of wis­
dom that realizes the true nature of phenomena. Once we have at­
tained this state of realization we are at a level that is 
inexhaustible and cannot be eradicated. At this point, all the neg­
ative qualities have been discarded and a vast amount of wisdom 
has been accumulated. But the wisdom accumulated when we 
have reached Buddhahood is not a solid, real entity or state. 
Therefore, to understand even though this state is inexhaustible, 
this wisdom has no reality of its own, that even the nature of this 
inexhaustible state is emptiness, we have to realize the emptiness 
of this state. 
12. Emptiness ofthe true nature. The emptiness of true nature 
refers to the pure essence, which is free of all adventitious stains 
and impurities. This pure nature is within all beings, but it does 
not exist as a solid or real thing within beings. Its nature is also 
emptiness. The Rangtong tradition criticizes the Shentong tradi­
tion by suggesting that the Shentong school makes the same error 
as the Brahmanical tradition when they describe an enduring 
"self' (Skt. atman ). The Rangtong argument is that the Shentong 
teaching about this "pure nature as devoid of all impurities" in 
other words, Buddha-nature, is the same enduring quality as has 
been ascribed to a self(or atman). If Buddha-nature (Skt. tatha­
gata-garbha) is believed to be eternal and real, then this view is 
definitely a mistaken view. If the Shentong tradition believes 
Buddha-essence is permanent, then the Shentong view is indeed 
in error. However, the Shentong tradition teaches that Buddha-
62 
The Middle-zvq} School 
nature is actually this emptiness and therefore has no reality of its 
own. This is the why this twelfth point on the emptiness of Bud­
dha-essence is so important. 
13. Emptiness of characteristics. The emptiness of characteristics 
concerns the effect or the result. There is the true nature or Bud­
dha-essence, which is the union of space and wisdom. Although 
this Buddha-essence is the nature of all beings, it is not recog­
nized by ordinary individuals. This true essence is the source of 
all the characteristics or qualities an individual gains at the time 
ofthe final result (or Buddhahood). When it is seen and directly 
understood, all the qualities of this true nature manifest. At that 
time, everything that needs to be eliminated will be eliminated 
and the characteristics of the Buddha's mind and body will man­
ifest from this pure nature, which is said to be the union of wis­
dom and emptiness. A Buddha's body has 32 major 
characteristics and 80 secondary characteristics. All of these char­
acteristics manifest from this pure nature, but even this pure na­
ture should not be seen as a truly existing entity. If we see this 
pure nature as existing, then we have mistaken the nature of the 
source of the 32 major and 80 secondary characteristics. By rec­
ognizing the emptiness of these characteristics, we realize that 
the source of all the 32 major and 80 secondary characteristics of 
a Buddha's body has no reality of its own. The nature of that 
source is emptiness. 
14. Emptiness of all dharmas (qualities). This last emptiness 
refers to the qualities of the Buddha's mind. We may categorize 
the qualities of a Buddha into the qualities of the Buddha's body 
and the qualities ofthe Buddha's mind. The qualities ofthe Bud­
dha's body are called the "form body" (Skt. rupakaya) and the 
qualities of the Buddha's mind are called the "truth body" (Skt. 
dharmakaya).18 This emptiness refers only to the level of the 
dharmakaya. The sambhogakaya and nirmanakaya which to­
gether comprise the rupakaya possess the 32 major and 80 sec-
63 
Shentong and Rangtong: Two Views of Emptiness 
ondary characteristics of a Buddha's body, whereas the dhar­
makaya has the qualities such as the ten powers, the four fear­
lessnesses, and so on. The Buddha's mind has the qualities of 
wisdom, compassion, and power. These qualities do manifest, 
but they should not be seen as truly existing entities. Therefore, 
this last emptiness speaks about the lack of reality of the Bud­
dha's mind, the emptiness of dharmas. 
These last four emptinesses are specific to the Mahayana and 
refer to the path and the fruition of the path. The first two relate 
to benefiting oneself and benefiting others at the level ofthe path. 
The last two relate to benefitting others and oneself at the level 
of the fruition. 
In summary, the teachings on the fourteen emptinesses show 
how all phenomena are empty. It is important that these teachings 
are understood, because if they aren't understood, then people 
could think that samsara is real and they would not want to go be­
yond samsara, that is, they would engage in the extreme of ni­
hilism. On the other hand, if the state of Buddhahood and the 
qualities of a Buddha are perceived as truly existent, then people 
would fall into the extreme of eternal ism. If they believe in the 
reality of the sufferings ofsamsara and of the liberation and qual­
ities of Buddhahood, they would follow the Foundation vehicle 
path of the shravakas and pratyekabuddhas, who strive to help 
only themselves. The fourteen emptinesses were taught by the 
Buddha to prevent this from happening. 
C. THE EMPTINESSES OF THE NONEXISTENCE OF PHENOMENA 
In addition to the fourteen emptinesses already presented, two 
more emptinesses are presented in the Shentong view .. The first 
of these, the emptiness of the non-existence of things, is given to 
refute the reality of mentally fabricated phenomena ("imaginary 
nature") and to refute the reality of the dependent state of the 
mind ("the dependent nature"). These have no true existence of 
their own. Second, because the state of complete perfection also 
64 
The Middle-wqy School 
has no reality of its own, so the emptiness of the essence of the 
absence of entities is given. In this way, these two emptinesses re­
fute any attachment to a reality of the three natures-of mentally 
fabricated phenomena, of the dependent appearances, or of the 
completely perfect. All three characteristics are taught as having 
no reality of their own. 
15. Emptiness of the non-existence of phenomena. There are three 
characteristics of phenomena presented by the Shentong school. 
The first two characteristics of phenomena, "the completely fab­
ricated or imagined" and "that which is dependent" are estab­
lished as empty of any nature of their own. This emptiness is 
based on the nonexistence of things. The emptiness of the non­
existence of phenomena is taught due to the absence of reality of 
the mentally fabricated and the dependent appearances. 
16. Emptiness of the essence of the non-existence of phenomena. 
This emptiness refers to the third characteristic of phenomena in 
the Shentong view or the "completely perfect." This is the true 
nature, which is also said to have no reality of its own; it too is 
devoid of a nature of its own. 
These two emptinesses demonstrate the non-reality of all 
three characteristics of phenomena as described in the Shentong 
tradition: the imaginary, the dependent, and the perfect. This is 
why the last two emptinesses-the emptiness of the non-exis­
tence of phenomena and the emptiness of the essence of the non­
existence of phenomena-are presented making sixteen kinds of 
emptiness in all. 
Questions 
Question: Would Rinpoche say something about the sequence 
in this text, about the four seals. 
Rinpoche: One must first have the correct view. Then how one 
65 
.\'bentong and Rangtong: Two Views of Emptiness 
gains realization of egolessness is taught. One starts with the pre­
liminaries of the four seals and knows that all that is composite 
is impermanent, all that is impure or polluted is suffering, all phe­
nomena are without a self, and nirvana is peace. One goes 
through the preliminaries in the practice of realizing that there is 
no self. Having done the preliminaries, one enters onto the path 
of going beyond the extremes of existence and non-existence. 
This is presented in terms of the Rangtong and Shentong 
teachings discussing the sixteen emptinesses. It is a progressive 
text; there is a general description of the correct view, a general 
explanation of how to develop the realization of egolessness, 
starting on the preliminary path of the four seals and going on 
the path of understanding the sixteen emptinesses (which are 
summarized into the two kinds of egolessnesses). That is how 
the subject is developed. 
Question: lfyou had realization ofnon-selfon that path, surely 
you could never really separate that realization from bodhichitta. 
In that case, how can one make a separation between Foundation 
and Mahayana realization? Is realization of Foundation vehicle 
the first bodhisattva level? 
Rinpoche: The first bodhisattva level is not reached with the re­
alization ofegolessness ofthe individual in the Great Exposition 
and Sutra-followers traditions. The first bodhisattva level is su­
perior when it comes to certain qualities and it is inferior when 
it comes to other qualities. One is progressing on the path in the 
first bodhisattva level and is meditating both on the egolessness 
of the individual and the egolessness of phenomena. The Great 
Exposition followers and Sautrantikas do not have the complete 
path, yet they go to the limit of their path. They have realized the 
egolessness of the individual completely, but ignore the egoless­
ness of phenomena. Their realization of the egolessness of the 
individual is superior to those on the first bodhisattva level, but 
their realization of the egolessness of phenomena is inferior to 
those on the first bodhisattva level. They have removed the ob­
scurations of the disturbing emotions completely. Therefore, they 
are superior to those on the first bodhisattva level, but they are in-
66 
The Middle-zvqy School 
ferior to those on the first bodhisattva level because they are not 
working to eliminate the obscuration of knowledge. They have 
completely removed only the obscurations of the disturbing emo­
tions. They don't have bodhichitta, the intention to benefit all be­
ings throughout space, because they are only working for their 
own liberation. This is why they are referred to as "Hinayana" in 
Sanskrit. In fact, the definition of the H inayana is "the path that 
is without bodhichitta." 
Question: I still cannot understand why realization of non-self in 
the Foundation vehicle doesn't spontaneously give rise to com­
passion or a wish to benefit others. The nature of phenomena has 
to be realized as being empty. There must be a relationship where 
they see that the nature of phenomena has to be dealt with and 
therefore compassion would naturally and spontaneously arise. 
Rinpoche: Followers of the Foundation vehicle meditate on the 
egolessness of the individual in order to remove the disturbing 
emotions. They do realize the obvious egolessness of phenom­
ena; otherwise they could not realize the egolessness of the indi­
vidual. But there is the subtle egolessness of phenomena, which 
they do not realize. The reason they practice is to benefit them­
selves, in which case they don't need compassion. Compassion 
means doing something for the benefit of others. 
Question: But surely once you realize some emptiness and non­
self, you would realize that everybody is in the same boat and 
compassion would naturally arise. 
Rinpoche: Some compassion. It is not that they have no com­
passion, but they practice because they want to get out of sam­
sara; this is their goal. They want to achieve that for themselves, 
so they don't have the non-dualistic compassion of a bodhisattva 
for everyone. 
67 
Shentong and Rangtong: Two Views of Emptiness 
A. Rangtong Madhyamaka 
I. They believe that on the ultimate and on the conven­
tional level all phenomena are empty. 
2. They believe that the passages in the Uttaratantra Shas­
tra and other Mahayana scriptures that say Buddha­
nature is permanent, eternal, and all pervasive gives 
only the provisional meaning. 
3. They follow the teachings ofNagarjuna closely and rely 
greatly on conceptual analysis of emptiness. 
4. Because of the work of Tsonkhapa and his immediate 
disciples, the Rangtong school is emphasized by the 
Gelugpa Tibetan sect. 
B. Shentong Madyamaka 
I. They belive that on the relative level, but not the ulti­
mate level everything is empty of self nature. 
2. They believe that on the ultimate level all phenomena 
are not empty. They believe that on the ultimate level, 
emptiness has a knowing, luminous quality. 
3. They believe the Uttaratantra Shastra and other Mahayana 
scriptures that say Buddha-nature is permanent, eternal, 
and all pervasive state the definitive meaning. 
4. These teachings are emphasized in the Kagyu and Nyingma 
sects ofTibetan Buddhism. 
5. They follow the teachings of the Mind-only school closely. 
6. They rely on the works of Asanga and the experience in 
meditation to establish their view. 
68 
7 
The Two Kinds of Egolessness 
V. ANALYSIS OF THE TWO EGOLESSNESSES 
The fifth major topic of the root text by Jamgon Kongtrul 
presents a simplified and condensed view of emptiness. 
The detailed explanation describes the sixteen empti­
nesses; the simplified version teaches the two kinds of ego less­
ness. It is divided into two sections: the purpose for teaching 
egolessness and an analysis of egolessness. 
A. THE PURPOSE FOR TEACHING EGOLESSNESS 
We practice dharma to reach Buddhahood. The siddhis or the 
powers acquired from intense meditation are attained from the 
Vajrayana way of practicing. In India, for example, great Bud­
dhist masters and siddhas such as Tilopa and Naropa attained the 
goal of the Vajrayana path. With the attainment of siddhis they 
were able to perform miracles and to have clairvoyant knowl­
edge. The ability to have siddhis is an external sign of attainment 
of realization on the tantric path. The internal signs of these sid­
dhis are the realization and experience attained, which appear 
only in the mind. Siddhis were not confined to India; there were 
masters and siddhas in Tibet such as Marpa and Milarepa who 
69 
Shentong and Rangtong: Two Views of Emptiness 
also attained siddhis as a result of practicing the Vajrayana path. 
The goal of the sutra path is achievement of Buddhahood. 
The sutra path can be explained by examining the etymology of 
the word for "Buddha," which was translated into Tibetan as 
"sang gye" essentially meaning "one who has developed wis­
dom." 
Samsara is characterized by suffering and difficulties. For ex­
ample, countries can have economic problems and their inhabi­
tants then experience suffering because wealth has declined and 
poverty is high. Political difficulties can cause the pain of war or 
strife among groups. People think, "If we can be free of poverty, 
political intrigues, and strife between us, then there will no longer 
be suffering." This is not true, however, because it is the nature 
of samsara that conflicts and suffering are always present. There­
fore, we must free ourselves from samsara in order to be freed 
from all suffering. As long as there is no freedom from samsara, 
there will always be uncountable sufferings, difficulties, and 
problems. 
The final result of the Buddhist path is usually called "liber­
ation." This denotes liberation from all suffering, difficulties, 
problems, and disturbing emotions. The ultimate result of the 
Buddhist path is "nirvana," which was translated into Tibetan 
nyang de and translated as "transcendence of suffering." It was 
translated in this way because in nirvana one passes beyond all 
suffering of the body and mind and becomes free from all suf­
fering and difficulties. The ultimate result can also be called 
"Buddhahood," which means "the development of wisdom." In 
translating the word "Buddha" into Tibetan as sang gye the trans­
lators used the first syllable sang which means purified and the 
second syllable gye which means "to increase." The meaning of 
the syllable sang indicates that all the causes of the suffering in 
samsara (negative tendencies and negative thoughts which arise 
in the mind) have been purified. A beginning practitioner has pu­
rified only a few negativities; he or she practices becoming more 
and more purified until Buddhahood is attained. At that level, all 
70 
The Two Kinds of Egofessness 
negative tendencies and thoughts have been eliminated. 
In addition to purifying negativities, a practitioner must also 
have realization, which comes from the increase (gye) of posi­
tive qualities. While we practice the dharma, we still have many 
faults because we have few positive qualities and very little pu­
rification. Therefore, we need to work on developing both the 
positive qualities and on reducing our negative qualities. Devel­
oping positive qualities helps reduce faults and reducing faults 
helps develop the good qualities. Thus eliminating faults and at­
taining realization mutually assist each other until we reach the 
state ofBuddhahood. At that point, all faults are completely elim­
inated and all qualities are completely developed or realized. At 
Buddhahood, all the causes of suffering have been eliminated 
and therefore the result is suffering that no longer exists. 
We have to attain the ultimate goal of Buddhahood, which 
means that we have to develop the qualities of wisdom; but we 
cannot attain Buddhahood by developing the positive qualities 
only. We also have to work on eliminating the faults or afflic­
tions. If we do not purify faults, then we will not be able to 
achieve Buddhahood with complete wisdom and all the positive 
qualities. These faults are called "obscurations" because they 
block us from the goal we wish to achieve. The obscurations are 
in our own mind; we have to remove them to develop the posi­
tive qualities and attain the ultimate result. There are many reli­
gions, such as the Bonpo and the Hindu religion which teach that 
an external power prevents liberation. They teach that it is nec­
essary to pray to that external power in order to win its favor and 
that this will bring liberation. In Buddhism, on the other hand, 
the view is different. Buddhism teaches that the obstacles that 
prevent us from attaining liberation are within ourselves and that 
we need to free ourselves from these obstacles to attain liberation. 
That is a special characteristic of Buddhism and distinguishes it 
from other religions. 
71 
Shentong and Rangtong: Two Views of Emptiness 
1. THE Two 0BSCURATIONS 
To attain the ultimate result, we need to eliminate the obscu­
rations. To eliminate these obscurations, it is necessary to know 
the two kinds of obscurations. Once they are recognized, they 
can be eliminated. The two obscurations are the obscuration of 
the disturbing emotions and the obscuration of knowledge. 
The first obscuration of the afflictions includes all the nega­
tive thoughts that arise in the mind (pride, miserliness, jealousy, 
delusion, stupidity, anger, malice and so on). The presence of 
these afflictions prevents us from being able to practice the 
dharma correctly, prevents us from being able to benefit others, 
and prevents us from being able to attain liberation. 
The second obscuration of knowledge is not obvious like the 
disturbing emotions (thoughts of anger and so on). Rather, this 
obscuration is our mind's habitual patterns which conflict with 
the true nature of reality. It is the incorrect mode of perception 
and the attachment to outer perceptions that the mind holds; it is 
the belief in the reality of phenomena. When the appearance of 
phenomena are perceived, we have an innate and spontaneous 
tendency to perceive them as being solid and real. In particular, 
this false belief perceives reality as composed of three spheres 
(subject, object, and action between them). This attitude believes 
in the reality of the subject (the one who is doing the action), the 
reality of the object (that upon which the action is being done), 
and the reality of the act itself. This obscuration of knowledge 
prevents us from attaining realization of the true nature of phe­
nomena and must be eliminated in order to achieve the goal of 
Buddhahood. 
2. ELIMINATING THE TWO OBSCURATIONS 
Eliminating these two obscurations requires a remedy. This 
remedy is the Buddha's teaching on the two kinds of egolessness. 
For example, if we become habituated to the disturbing emotion 
72 
The Tu;o Kinds of Egolessness 
of desire and don't try to eliminate it, this emotion will become 
stronger and result in our experiencing increased difficulties and 
suffering. How can disturbing emotions be eliminated? The first 
way is to recognize that they will bring suffering. Second, we 
can work on suppressing them, which will reduce their potency, 
but this won't entirely eliminate them. A third way is to keep the 
objects of the disturbing emotions at a distance by avoiding them, 
but this won't work completely either. None of these methods 
(identifying the negative, suppressing it, or distancing from it) 
will entirely eliminate disturbing emotions. 
We can completely eliminate disturbing emotions, however, 
by looking at their source and recognizing that thoughts of "I," 
and "my" cause our disturbing emotions. When we perceive the 
dualism of an "I" and "others," we automatically feel an attach­
ment to our self and regard it as more important than others. We 
also automatically feel a desire or attachment for what we wish 
to have and a disdain for our aggression towards what we think 
we dislike. Both these thoughts of desire and aversion arise from 
our basic attachment to the idea of a self. However, if we closely 
examine what the self is and where the "I" or "me" is located, 
we discover that these have no true existence and cannot be 
found. Once this source of suffering, the disturbing emotions, is 
removed, desire (for what we want), anger (against those we 
don't want) and jealousy (towards those who we believe have 
what we want) will not arise. We then become free from the dis­
turbing emotions by realizing the egolessness ofthe individual. 
Realizing the egolessness of the individual is not a means to 
suppress or distance oneself from the disturbing emotions. 
Rather, it eliminates the disturbing emotions completely. There­
fore, the teaching on the egolessness of the individual is the rem­
edy that eliminates the obstacle of the disturbing emotions. 
The second obscuration, the obscuration of knowledge, is that 
we do not understand the true nature of phenomena. Rather, we 
believe that phenomena have true existence. Because we are at­
tached to phenomena and believe that they have true reality, the 
73 
Shentong and Rangtong: Two Views of En1ptiness 
mind misperceives samsara. We can eliminate that obscuration 
which misunderstands the true nature of phenomena by examin­
ing phenomena closely and discovering that they do not have a 
true existence of their own. We do this by understanding the 
teachings of emptiness: First, we listen to and study the teach­
ings and gain some superficial understanding. Second, we con­
template the teachings on emptiness and gain the wisdom (Skt. 
prajna) arising from contemplation. Finally, we actually meditate 
on emptiness and gain the wisdom that arises from meditation. 
Through all this, we realize that things have no true existence of 
their own and this eliminates an incorrect understanding of phe­
nomena. Once that incorrect understanding is eliminated, there 
will no longer be delusion and error in our perception of the na­
ture of phenomena. This is the realization of the egolessness of 
phenomena, which eliminates the second obstacle, the obscura­
tion to knowledge. 
8. ANALYSIS OF EGOLESSNESS 
The second part of the fifth section, the analysis of ego less­
ness, is subdivided into five parts. It may be confusing at first to 
hear about all the sections and subsections, but this is how the 
text is structured and makes it easier to understand. The first sub­
division, which deals with the egolessness of phenomena, is also 
divided into five parts. We will go through each point. 
1. THE EGOLESSNESS OF PHENOMENA 
a. THE ESSENTIAL MEANING OF 
THE EGOLESSNESS OF PHENOMENA 
Although there is general agreement about what is meant by 
"the egolessness of phenomena," there are many different views 
when it comes to the actual subtleties of this topic. Different 
scholars have different interpretations of emptiness. For example, 
74 
The Two Kinds of Egolessness 
Scholar A may say, "The egolessness of phenomena is not real­
ized by the shravakas." Scholar B will then respond: "Egoless­
ness of phenomena is realized by the shravakas." Scholar C says: 
"The egolessness of phenomena has to be realized first, other­
wise one cannot realize the egolessness of the individual." 
Scholar D may argue: "That is not right. The egolessness of the 
individual can be understood purely by itself and without realiz­
ing the egolessness of phenomena." 
There are many different opinions about detailed matters, 
such as whether shravakas can realize the egolessness of phe­
nomena or not. Jamgon Kongtrul presents his own view of the 
egolessness of phenomena in The Compendium of Knowledge. 
He says there are two kinds of egolessness of phenomena: obvi­
ous egolessness and subtle egolessness. The obvious egolessness 
of phenomena was described above when we analyzed the hand 
and concluded that external phenomena have no true existence. 
This obvious egolessness of phenomena is, according to Jamgon 
Kongtrul, the level of external emptiness understood by practi­
tioners of all three yanas (shravakas, the pratyekabuddhas, and 
bodhisattvas ). All three levels teach and understand the obvious 
egolessness of phenomena. There is, however, a subtle ego less­
ness of phenomena that is understood only by bodhisattvas. 
If the obvious egolessness of phenomena is not understood 
correctly, the egolessness of the individual cannot be ascertained. 
We have an innate belief in a self from the time we are born. In­
nately, we have no doubt as to whether there is a self. We are 
born with an immediate belief in the presence of an "I" and "me" 
that lasts throughout our life. It is a very strong and solid belief 
because we have held this belief throughout all of our previous 
lifetimes. We are habituated to it and it is present in us whether 
we are young or old. It is not a belief that we have developed 
through investigation or intellectual reasoning; rather, the belief 
that a self is naturally present is based on our habitual patterns. 
Because this belief is so strong and feels so natural to us, it is 
very difficult to remove. It takes much practice and understand-
75 
Shenton!!, and Rangtonf!,: Two Views of Emptiness 
ing to eliminate this belief in a self because it is so ingrained in 
us. If we can understand this first obvious egolessness of phe­
nomena, it will be possible for us to understand the egolessness 
of the individual. 
The second subtle egolessness of phenomena concerns the 
belief in non-existence in contrast to the belief in existence. It is 
possible to become attached to an incorrect understanding of non­
existence. Saraha said: "Those who believe that things exist are 
as stupid as a cow, but those who believe in the non-existence of 
phenomena are even more foolish." Shantideva gives an exam­
ple: "A man dreams that a son is born to him and that the son 
dies. He is then very upset." First he believed in the existence of 
a son in his dream and then he believed in the non-existence of a 
son in his dream. Non-existence is a remedy for the thought of 
existence, so believing that the son does not exist any more 
should be a remedy for the previous belief in the existence of a 
son. However, by believing in the non-existence of a son, the 
man is in a worse state than before, because now he is very upset. 
His belief in the nonexistence of a son is a grave mistake because 
there was no son to begin with. In the same way, although we be­
lieve in the existence of phenomena and appearances, they are 
merely illusions, like appearances in a dream. Believing in the 
non-existence of phenomena is an even more grave error. Real­
izing this error is realizing the subtle egolessness of phenomena. 
The Importance of Meditation Practice 19 
Generally speaking, practicing dharma includes learning and 
studying the teachings. Practicing the dharma also includes the 
practice of meditation. In Tibet learning and studying usually 
took place in large monasteries such as Sera, Drepung, and Gang­
den for the Gelugpas and at Palpung and Tsurphu for the Kagyu­
pas. The monks spent a great deal of time studying texts and 
analyzing them logically to understand their meaning. During the 
study program they did not study the tantras; their study concen-
76 
The Tu'o Kinds of Egofessness 
trated on the sutras, the Madhyamaka or "Middle-way," the Pra­
jnaparamita, and the Abhidharma and so on. They received teach­
ings on the texts, studied them, and contemplated the instructions. 
It traditionally took twelve years to study the sutra texts such as 
the Prajnaparamita, the Abhidharma and the Vinaya. We may 
then ask, "What about their meditation practice?" Some of these 
monks then did a three-year retreat and some even spent a life­
time in meditation. What did they meditate on? Did they medi­
tate on the Middle-way, the Vinaya or the Abhidharma? No, they 
did not meditate on these texts; they studied them and then med­
itated on the Six Yogas ofNaropa, Mahamudra, and deities such 
as Chakrasamvara, Hevajra and so on. We may then ask, "What 
is the connection between study and meditation?" They are not 
distinct from each other; rather each helps the other. Meditation 
helps study and study helps meditation. 
While learning and contemplating the teachings, we engage 
in a great deal of logical analysis to discover the correct under­
standing of what emptiness is. We engage in this logical analy­
sis, thinking and contemplating to develop certainty about 
emptiness. We gain certainty from studying, but we do not med­
itate on these teachings ofthe Middle-way. Why don't we med­
itate on the sutra teachings? The reason we don't is because it 
would take a very long time to achieve any result by meditating 
on the sutras. It is said that in the sutra tradition one needs to ac­
cumulate merit for an eon before attaining Buddhahood. There­
fore, when it comes to meditation, we use the oral instructions on 
meditation, which are not presented using analytical reasoning. 
Naropa and Tilopa, for example, spent their lives meditating until 
they gained experience and realization. Milarepa ignored food, 
clothes, and possessions and spent his life meditating, gaining 
realization and experience. He was then able to tell his pupils, "I 
meditated in this way and now you can do it. If you do, you will 
obtain the same result." By studying, we gain certainty and know 
how things are, concluding, "Well, I know how things are. Now 
I need to meditate on what I have learned." Through studying, 
77 
Shentong and Rangtong: Two Views of Emptiness 
we develop a definite knowledge about emptiness, whereas med­
itation practice depends upon a teacher's instructions and then 
following these instructions. Instead of presenting analytical rea­
soning, the teacher simply gives direct meditation instructions. In 
the Tibetan tradition of the great scholars and siddhis, one stud­
ies the sutra tradition when one studies, and one practices the 
tantra tradition when one meditates. 
Both study and meditation are necessary. We could learn, 
contemplate, and study all the time. But, those who only study 
and learn as academic thinkers and who do not meditate are com­
pared to a wealthy miser. The miser accumulates much wealth 
but doesn't use it, either for his own benefit or for others' bene­
fit. He simply keeps it. Similarly, someone could study a lot and 
have much knowledge but ifhe or she doesn't meditate, then this 
knowledge is of no benefit to anyone. Therefore, in addition to 
study, we need meditation. On the other hand, if someone just 
meditates all the time and never studies, that meditator will only 
have a vague idea about how things are and can be called "an 
idiot meditator." He or she is like someone who tries to climb a 
cliff without having any hands. In the same way, we need to study 
and understand what we are doing in order to meditate properly. 
We need to study whenever possible and we need to practice 
meditation as well as we can. We should use the sutra tradition 
when we study and use the tantra tradition when we meditate. It 
is said that if we do that, then we will have a good result and that 
this complies with the tradition. 
We can study all the texts on the egolessness of the individ­
ual, the egolessness of phenomena, emptiness, no-self and so on 
and still never find an answer to the question to, "How do I med­
itate?'' We are stuck and think, "I don't know how to meditate." 
To learn to meditate we have to go to the lineage of meditation 
instructions which have been handed down from Tilopa, Naropa, 
and Marpa (in the Kagyu tradition.) This transmission of medi­
tation instructions has never been interrupted or broken. We can 
receive the transmission of these meditation instructions and tell 
78 
The Two Kinds of Egolessness 
others, "This is how one meditates. Meditate like this." 
In the earlier section we saw that there are sixteen empti­
nesses that explain the egolessness of phenomena and the ego­
lessness of the individual. We went through the first part of this 
section and saw that there are two kinds of egolessness of phe­
nomena: the obvious egolessness and the subtle egolessness. To 
realize the egolessness of the individual, we have to meditate 
upon the obvious egolessness of phenomena. Thus, realization 
ofthe obvious egolessness of phenomena is a prerequisite for re­
alizing the egolessness of the individual. But, to achieve Bud­
dhahood, we have to meditate upon the subtle egolessness of 
phenomena as well. 
b. THE NATURE OF THE EGOLESSNESS OF SELF 
The egolessness of phenomena is realized when one is able 
to eliminate the belief in the solidity or self of phenomena. What 
is the nature ofthe belief in the selfofphenomena? An example 
is given: it is like perceiving a rope as a snake. Ifwe see a rope 
and believe it to be a snake, then that is a delusion, an incorrect 
perception. In the same way, if we see phenomena and think they 
are truly existent, then that is a delusion and incorrect. If we see 
the rope and think it is a rope, that is not a delusion; but if we see 
the rope and think it is a snake, that is a delusion. If we see ap­
pearances and perceive them as having reality, that is a delusion. 
It is the belief in the self or solidity of phenomena, which has to 
be eliminated. 
c. WHY THE SELF OF PHENOMENA MUST BE REFUTED 
The third part of the explanation on the egolessness of phe­
nomena describes why we need to abandon the belief in the self 
of phenomena. The belief in the self of phenomena is both the 
source of this obscuration of knowledge and of the disturbing 
emotions. Therefore, it is the source of the obscuration of the dis-
79 
Shentong and Rangtong: Two Views of Emptiness 
turbing emotions. We cannot attain Buddhahood as long as we 
have these two obscurations. When we have the obscuration of a 
belief in a self and the disturbing emotions, we cannot attain full 
result and cannot help other beings. We may be able to give lim­
ited help at certain times through our activity, but when the texts 
speak about "benefiting other beings," they mean freeing them 
from suffering and giving them happiness. Therefore, we need 
to be free of these two obscurations. To be free of these two ob­
scurations, we need to eliminate the belief in the inherent exis­
tence of phenomena. That is why eliminating the belief in the 
egolessness of phenomena is essential. 
In the Golden Rosary, Nagarjuna said that we must abandon 
attachment to the aggregates as being the self. There are five ag­
gregates: form, feeling, sensation, formation, and consciousness 
and if we are attached to them as being our own aggregates, we 
will have the thought of "I" and "my." Once we have this at­
tachment to the self, we think of those things we wish to attain; 
we have desires and such thoughts as, "That person wishes to 
harm me" which gives rise to anger, or, "This person is compet­
ing with me" which gives rise to jealousy. Or we may think, 
"This person is lower than me" which gives rise to pride. All 
kinds of different sensations and experiences will arise due to at­
tachment to a self. Also, we will not remain passive when we are 
attached to the self; we will engage in physical and verbal con­
duct so that things will go well for ourselves and badly for oth­
ers. We seek our own victory and other's defeat; we want to be 
higher and we want others to be lower. These are negative moti­
vations in relation to others. Therefore, it is important to elimi­
nate attachment to a self. 
Even if we do not have a particularly negative and contrived 
motivation, as long as we are attached to a self, it is very difficult 
to have the attitude that the happiness of others is as important as 
our own. Indeed, we will accumulate karma even without such a 
negative motivation; but if we accumulate karma with a negative 
motivation, we will have a bad rebirth. In any case, if we remain 
attached to a self, we will accumulate karma and be reborn with 
80 
The 7Jvo Kinds of Egolessness 
the result. With better motivation, we will have better karma, and 
a better rebirth. As we are going to be continually reborn, at­
tachment to a self is going to increase and become stronger. That 
is why it is important to eliminate this attachment to a self. In 
order to eliminate attachment to a self, we need to have realiza­
tion of the egolessness of phenomena. 
d. REALIZING EGOLESSNESS OF PHENOMENA 
IN DIFFERENT TRADITIONS 
The fourth section deals with the view of the egolessness of 
phenomena in the four different Buddhist traditions: the Great 
Exposition (Skt. Vaibhashika), the Sutra-school (Skt. 
Sautantrikas), the Mind-only (Skt. Chittamatra), and the Mid­
dle-way (Skt. Madhyamaka) tradition. These traditions are sim­
ilar in that they all speak about realizing the egolessness of 
phenomena. They, nevertheless, disagree about how one realizes 
this. 
There are four traditions: the first three (the Great Exposi­
tion, Sutra-school and Mind-only) are called "realists" and the 
fourth (the Middle-way) are called "the proponents of empti­
ness." The first three are called "realists" because these traditions 
assert that there are some existing entities that have a true exis­
tence. The fourth tradition, the Middle-way followers, asserts that 
all phenomena, without exception, are empty. 
The Great Exposition, the Sutra-school, and the Mind-only 
realist traditions can be divided into two groups; the first group 
contains the Great Exposition followers and Sutra-school fol­
lowers with minor differences between these two schools in their 
approach but, generally speaking, they agree on the definition of 
the egolessness of phenomena. Therefore, the Great Exposition 
followers and the Sutra-school are both Foundation vehicle 
schools and have the same view about the egolessness of phe­
nomena. The second realistic view is found in the teachings of the 
Mind-only tradition. 
81 
Shentong and R.angtong: Two Views of Emptiness 
The Great Exposition and the Sutra-school Traditions 
What do the Great Exposition followers and Sutra-school 
teach? These traditions teach that there are external phenomena 
that have a real material existence made up of real atoms. All ex­
ternal phenomena (a mountain, a river, our body) have real ma­
terial existence and are composed of atoms. These atoms are 
believed to have a true existence. External phenomena (visual 
forms seen with the eyes, sounds heard by the ears, smells per­
ceived with the nose, tastes perceived with the tongue, and tac­
tile sensations perceived by the body) also have a true material 
existence. Then there are internal phenomena, such as cognition, 
which are not made up material and atoms. Cognition consists 
of the consciousnesses that relate directly to each of the sensory 
organs (eyes, ears, nose, tongue, and body) and the mental con­
sciOusness. 
The Great Exposition and Sutra-school followers say that 
these consciousnesses are not material. They are not composed of 
atoms, but they do exist as awareness and cognition rather than 
as a concrete form. The consciousness of the eye, of the nose, of 
the ear, of the tongue, and of the body exist as consciousnesses. 
Thus, there are two kinds of entities, external material entities 
composed of atoms and internal entities composed of conscious­
ness and awareness. Apart from these two kinds of entities, noth­
ing else exists. 
The realists of these schools say that the very large external 
forms we perceive such as mountains, houses, bodies, etc. are all 
composed of atoms. Even though we can see and use material 
objects, their existence is merely conceptual, an imputation of 
the mind. For example, a cup can be seen and the mind can think 
about it; but the idea ofthe cup is merely a creation of the mind. 
There isn't really such a thing as a cup. "Cup" is a mentally fab­
ricated idea about a collection of atoms because there are thou­
sands of different kinds of cups. There isn't such a thing as a hand 
either. We ascribe the idea "hand" to the collection of its parts; a 
82 
The Two Kinds qf Egolessness 
hand is composed of a thumb, other fingers, flesh, bones, etc. and 
is a mental imputation. Similarly, "thumb" is a mental imputation 
composed of joints, a nail, flesh and bones. The thumb itself 
doesn't exist but is a mental imputation ascribed to a specific col­
lection of parts. Each section of a thumb is divided into parts as 
well. Each section has middle, right, and left parts. This applies 
not just to a cup or hand but to all phenomena. Phenomena can 
be divided again and again and chopped up into even smaller 
parts with a knife, until one reaches the smallest possible parti­
cle, called "the smallest atom possible" because it cannot be di­
vided into further parts. The Great Exposition followers say that 
these basic components really exist and that all things are com­
posed of these basic atoms. These components are believed to be 
real objects. 
The Great Exposition followers teach that the inner mind is 
neither material nor composed of atoms. The mind cannot be di­
vided into parts; it is simply luminous clarity of understanding 
and awareness. It is, however, divisible in terms of the flow of 
time. Realists say that the flow of time is a succession of instants; 
that there is such a thing as an indivisible unit of time, a smallest 
possible unit of time. Because time is a succession of the small­
est units of time, there is a succession of minds. We can think of 
"my mind" as one unit, but the mind we had when we were chil­
dren was different from the mind we have now. The way the mind 
of a child thinks and the mind of an adult thinks are very differ­
ent. The way the mind of an adult and a very old person thinks 
are very different as well. The way of thinking is different, the 
thoughts are different, the abilities ofthe mind are different and 
so on. 
We can take a more subtle approach to looking at the mind. 
The mind changes with each passing year and with each passing 
month. In fact, the mind is different with each passing day; the 
mind of yesterday is gone and now we have the new mind of 
today. Similarly, the mind we had an hour ago is not the same as 
the mind we have now, and the mind we have now is different 
83 
Shentong and Rangtong: Two Vie1vs if Emptiness 
from the mind we will have in the next hour. The same is true if 
we consider the mind from minute to minute or from second to 
second and so on. We follow this process until we reach a period 
of time which is not obvious or perceivable, but which is defined 
as "the smallest possible unit of time." Realists say that there is 
a continuous succession of these "smallest possible units of 
time." They liken them to a flowing river that never stands still. 
Flowing water is constantly followed and replaced by new water. 
In the same way, the mind is continually replaced by a new mind 
through the succession of these indivisible and tiniest units of 
time. The Great Exposition followers and Sautrantikas thus teach 
that the mind is not a single, indivisible entity, but is a succession 
of the minutest instants of mind. 
The shravaka tradition (the Great Exposition followers and 
Sutra-followers) teaches that there are material atoms as well as 
instants of consciousness and that everything is composed of ei­
ther the one or the other. They use these arguments for the prac­
tical reason which is that we should not have an attachment to a 
self when all that exists are atoms and indivisible instants of con­
sciousness. We should not be attached either to a self of phe­
nomena or to a self of the individual. This is how they conceive 
of the egolessness of phenomena. However, this shravaka tradi­
tion is not able to attain full realization of emptiness because they 
still believe that the smallest possible atoms and instants of con­
sciousness have real existence. They remain attached to the real­
ity of atoms and instants of consciousness. This is why they are 
not able to develop a complete realization of emptiness. This is 
how the shravaka tradition of the Great Exposition followers and 
Sautrantikas realize the egolessness of phenomena and how they 
realize the egolessness of the individual. 
The Mind-only Tradition 
The Mind-only school has a view different from the Great 
Exposition followers and Sutra-followers, who teach that ifthere 
84 
The Tu;o Kinds of Egolessness 
were no external, material atoms, then no external appearance 
could be perceived. The Mind-only proponents, in contrast, say 
that external appearances can be perceived without external, ma­
terial atoms. They give the example of dreams. We see tigers, 
lions, mountains, rivers, houses, and so on when we dream. We 
see things as if they exist externally and as if they are composed 
of atoms, but, in fact, there are no atoms. In a dream, we hear 
sounds as if we were hearing external sounds with our ears, we 
see objects as if we were seeing external objects with our eyes, 
and we smell things as if we were smelling external smells with 
our nose, but in a dream there are no external sounds, forms, 
smells and so on. All these appearances arise from the mind only. 
The Mind-only proponents teach that it is the same when we are 
awake-everything that we perceive arises from the mind itself. 
There is no external form that exists and there are no atoms and 
there are no instants of time. All things merely arise from the 
mind, and this explains the egolessness of phenomena. But, it is 
said that the mind itself must have some reality. The mind, which 
is the source of all appearances, must exist. Therefore, the Mind­
only proponents believe in the true existence of the mind. This is 
why the Mind-only proponents do not completely comprehend 
emptiness. They believe in the true existence of the subtle mind, 
which is the basis for all appearances. This is why they are called 
"Chittamatra" with chitta being "mind" and matra being "only or 
just." The Chittamatra school is called "Mind-only" because its 
proponents believe that the mind has true existence. Although 
they understand the obvious egolessness of phenomena, they 
have not realized subtle egolessness. 20 
e. THE MIDDLE-WAY ANALYSES OF 
THE EGOLESSNESS OF PHENOMENA 
The fifth and final part of the explanation ofthe egolessness 
of phenomena describes the Middle-way view. The previous sec­
tion presented the Great Exposition, the Sutra-school and the 
85 
Shentong and Rangtong: Two Views of Emptiness 
Mind-only views. Now we will see how the followers of the Mid­
dle-way school explain emptiness through logical analysis. 
The Buddha taught the meaning of emptiness in the sutras, 
particularly in the Prajnaparamita sutras. Nagarjuna was the first 
siddha who explained these sutras in detail. In a sutra the Buddha 
prophesied the coming ofNagarjuna, in which he said, "In a land 
called Vidar there will be a monk named Naga,21 who will un­
derstand, teach, and prove the existence of emptiness." Nagar­
juna wrote commentaries on the Buddha's teachings on 
emptiness, with his main work being The Mula-madhyamaka­
prajna ("The Wisdom of the Middle-way"). This was the basic 
outline of his arguments. In other treatises he set forth the dif­
ferent ways of analyzing phenomena and of logically proving 
emptiness so that people would be able to understand this teach­
ing clearly and be able to have conviction in it. 
Nagarjuna 's Analyses Showing the Emptiness of Phenomena 
Is a seed the cause from which the flower grows? The dis­
cussion of whether the sprout comes from the seed is carried out 
in order to see that the seed is different than the sprout; they are 
different. First, one cannot say that something gives rise to itself. 
Looking at a seed, for example, it is white, gray, or brown, 
whereas a sprout is green; they are different colors. A seed is 
round and a sprout is long; they taste differently too. So, a seed 
and a sprout have no characteristics in common. You cannot say 
that a seed grows out of itself because the sprout is completely 
different. Second, you cannot argue that something arises from 
something else because that would mean a sprout could arise 
from a stone because a stone is other than the sprout. A sprout 
must come from a seed. It definitely does not come from some­
thing else. Nonetheless, one cannot definitely establish the rela­
tionship between the sprout and the seed; one cannot say that the 
seed is the cause and the sprout is the result. 
86 
The T1vo Kinds of Egolessness 
If seed has true existence, then the seed would exist, the 
flower would exist, and the seed would be the cause from which 
the flower grows. One might think that this is the case, but Na­
garjuna explains that it is not so. The seed does not give rise to 
the flower. One might suppose that the flower obviously comes 
from the seed, but if we think about it and take the time to ana­
lyze, then we will see that it is not so. The seed and the flower are 
different colors and have different shapes; they are not at all the 
same. The seed is not capable of giving birth, giving rise to a 
flower. In that case, where does the flower come from? The 
flower naturally appears; it is an appearance without any true re­
ality of its own. For example, if you see a house in a dream, you 
might think, "Who built that house and how was it built?" It 
might be explained, "A certain person built it on a certain prop­
erty and used this and that material." All these explanations are 
not valid because the "house" is without any reality at all, so no­
body could have built it. Similarly, the appearance of a flower 
has no reality whatsoever. It is an appearance without any true ex­
istence. You might wonder, "If the flower does not come from 
the seed, does it come from something else?" No, a flower did not 
come from something else because if this were true, there would 
be no connection between the flower and the seed. The point is 
that at one time there is the appearance of a seed and later there 
is the appearance of a flower, but the seed did not give rise to the 
flower. The seed is not the cause. This establishes that a seed and 
a flower have no true existence of their own and exemplifies the 
investigation of the cause as presented by Nagarjuna. 
Like the analysis of the cause, Nagarjuna had five different 
methods of analyses 22 to establish emptiness, including analysis 
of the result, analysis of the nature and so on. 
Cha11drakirti's Two Types of Analyses 
In a later time, the great Middle-way master Chandrakirti also 
presented two kinds of analyses to prove the emptiness of phe-
87 
Shentong and Rangtong: Two Views of Emptiness 
nomena. First, if one looks at external phenomena as the Mind­
only followers do, then one can establish that there is no reality 
to external phenomena, that external phenomena have no true ex­
istence. Chandrakirti looks at the inner consciousnesses and finds 
that internal consciousnesses arise depending upon external phe­
nomena; Chandrakirti then concludes that ifthere are no external 
phenomena, there can be no inner consciousnesses. In this way, 
if there is a blue object then there is an inner consciousness that 
perceives the blue object, which is dependent upon the external 
blue object. Consequently, ifthere is no blue object, then there is 
no internal consciousness either. Thus, if there is no external phe­
nomenon, there is no reality to the internal consciousnesses and 
ifthere is no reality to internal consciousnesses, there can be no 
external phenomenon. Both internal and external are therefore 
said to be devoid of any reality. That is the first logical analysis 
by Chandrakirti. 
The second logical argument is the argument of single and 
composites which we have already described in analyzing the 
hand. We discover with close analysis that any external object 
such as a hand is made up of different components. Therefore 
there is no truly existing hand. This analysis directly applies to 
everything else; mountains, houses, and trees appear and are un­
derstood in the same way as the example of the hand. 
Those are the two types of logical analyses by Chandrakirti. 
Nagarjuna presented the view of the Middle-way so that his 
pupils understood it. They believed in it and taught it and later 
Chandrakirti and his pupils transmitted and explained this view. 
This concludes the five parts of the explanation of the ego less­
ness of phenomena. 
88 
8 
The Egolessness of the Individual 
2. THE EGOLESSNESS OF THE INDIVIDUAL 
The egolessness of the individual is presented to show the 
difference between those who follow the Buddhist tradi­
tion and those who follow non-Buddhist traditions. 
a. ESSENTIAL MEANING OF 
EGOLESSNESS OF THE INDIVIDUAL 
One could say that those who have taken refuge in the Bud­
dha, dharma, and sangha are followers of the Buddhist tradition 
and those who have not taken refuge in the Buddha, dharma, and 
sangha are followers of non-Buddhist traditions. One could make 
this obvious distinction, but this is a distinction based upon ex­
ternal factors. The real distinction between the Buddhist path and 
the non-Buddhist path concerns the selflessness or egolessness of 
the individual. Those who believe that the self exists as a definite 
entity belong to the non-Buddhist traditions. Those who do not 
believe in the solid reality of the individual belong to the Bud­
dhist tradition. 
89 
Shenton/!, and RanJ?,tong: Two Views of Emptiness 
The Obvious and Subtle Egolessness of the Individual 
There are two kinds ofbeliefin the selfofthe individual: the 
obvious and the subtle. As previously described, a small child 
without having been told anything, instinctively believes in a self, 
in an "I" and "my." That belief is spontaneously present in every­
one, young or old, and does not involve any contemplation, such 
as asking oneself, "Is the self permanent? Is it impermanent? Is 
it mental or material?" Without any contemplation, the thought or 
feeling that there is an "I" is always present in us and this belief 
has been present in all of our previous lives. This is the subtle 
belief in a self. 
The more obvious belief in a self is a conceptually created 
belief in a self. The presence of a self is commonly accepted as 
common sense. Buddhist scholars examine that self asking, 
"Where is the selflocated? What kind of qualities does it have?" 
The Buddha taught that this examination shows that the self is de­
void of any nature or essence of its own, that there is no self; 
therefore the belief in a self is a delusion. Other scholars, how­
ever, don't agree with that assessment. 
Almost every non-Buddhist tradition accepts the existence of 
a self and has conceptual theories about whether it is permanent 
or impermanent, whether it is material or mental and so on. In 
accepting that the self exists, scholars often come to the conclu­
sion that the consciousnesses of the individual is actually the 
"self." Still other scholars reply, "No, the different conscious­
nesses are not the self because consciousnesses are not stable. 
They continually change and therefore the self must be material. 
It is therefore a physical form." 24 Other scholars think, "The self 
is permanent because it goes from one lifetime to the next." Oth­
ers reject this conclusion and argue, "No, the self is not perma­
nent because a person is different from one lifetime to the next." 
These scholars come to different conclusions on the nature of the 
self. Beliefs in a self are all conceptual fabrications and are there­
fore classified as the obvious belief in the self by the individual. 
90 
The Egolessness of the Individual 
The traditions that believe in the existence of the self develop 
views concerning the self through logical analysis or through the 
practice of meditation. By practicing meditation, there still may 
be the tendency to believe in the self and to think that this selfhas 
endured through many lifetimes. When they meditate, they think 
that the luminous clarity, this awareness, this knowing in their 
meditation, is permanent and must be the self. Whether this view 
of the self is developed through logic or observations in medita­
tion, these approaches are mentally created beliefs by the indi­
vidual. 
The Buddhist tradition alone questions the existence of the 
self. The Buddha tried to discover the nature of the self, looked 
at the mind's essence and discovered that there is no self of the 
individual. However, in other traditions there are conceptually 
created views of the self, as well as the innate and instinctive be­
lief in the self. In these traditions that believe in a self, people do 
not even consider looking to see whether the self is permanent or 
not, so their view is quite vague and indefinite. Thus, sometimes 
they identify the self as being the five skandhas, sometimes the 
physical body, and sometimes the mind. It is only in the Bud­
dhist tradition that it is taught that the self does not to exist. 
How do we eliminate the belief in the self? Simply thinking, 
"I must get rid of this belief in the self' will not eliminate this be­
lief. Conceptual beliefs are not the main problem because what 
creates the obstacle is an innate belief in the self and that belief 
needs to be eliminated. What we must do is realize that there is 
no self and the belief in the self is a delusion. Conceptually ex­
amining ourselves and seeing that there is no self will not result 
in an immediate elimination ofthis belief in a permanent selfbe­
cause the belief in a self is a very strong habitual belief built up 
over many lifetimes. Even though we develop some conceptual 
understanding that there is no self, this deep-seated belief re­
mains. This belief can only be removed through meditating again 
and again; this alone will remove the subtle belief in the self. 
91 
Shentong and Rangtong: Two Views of Emptiness 
Meditation to Realize Egolessness 
In the Vajrayana or tantra tradition one practices for the pur­
pose of realizing egolessness. The meditation on egolessness con­
sists oftwo paths: the path of methods and the path ofliberation. 
In the path of methods, there are many methods and practices 
we can do employingyantrayoga which are physical exercises of 
the body. We can also practice the creation stage or the visuali­
zation practice of different deities. The path of methods consists 
of a great variety of methods. 
The second path of liberation is a simple meditation that leads 
to the understanding of emptiness. It is difficult to focus the mind 
in the beginning because it won't stay still. To make the mind 
still, we practice Tranquility or Shamatha meditation. In Tran­
quility meditation we initially focus the mind on the movement 
of the breath to stabilize the mind. Focusing on the breath all the 
time may become dull because there is nothing to show from the 
in and out of the breath. So, we can then stop focusing on the 
breath and focus on the mind itself. 
The mind is composed of eight consciousnesses; we have the 
five sensory consciousnesses of the eye, the ear, the nose, the 
tongue, the body, and the sixth mental consciousness. The five 
sensory consciousnesses are non-conceptual. The eye directly 
sees its object without having any thought such as "This is big." 
or "I like this." and the same applies to the other sensory con­
sciousnesses. There is no conceptualization because the eye sees 
directly and experiences the object of perception without 
thoughts. It is the sixth mental consciousness that is unsteady and 
filled with thoughts. The sixth mental consciousness gives rise to 
thoughts about today, yesterday, tomorrow, anger, desire, good 
and bad, etc. Ifwe do not examine and look at what the mental 
consciousness is doing, then all sorts of thoughts arise and the 
mind wanders off in all directions. 
In meditation we observe the mental consciousness so that 
we know what is happening in the mind. We know when a 
92 
The Egolessness of the Individual 
thought arises and when it doesn't. We are aware ofthe thoughts 
that occur. Normally, when we are not meditating, we have a con­
tinuous outpouring of thoughts and we do not look at the mind. 
In contrast, thoughts do not go off in different directions in med­
itation when we look at them and see, "Now I am thinking this. 
Now I am thinking that." When we examine mind, there is a nat­
ural luminosity of the mind that we use to look at what is hap­
pening in the mind. This natural clarity is developed through 
Shamatha practice. 
We might think, "It is impossible to have mind which is look­
ing and at the same time is being looked at." But, in fact, it is 
possible. The teachings explain that mind has two aspects: lumi­
nous clarity and mental events (Tib. salwa and sem jung). The 
mind is luminous and aware and the mental events are any kind 
of thought that appears. The mind is not solid; it cannot be 
grasped or described as having a particular color, shape, or form. 
The clarity of the mind can observe what thoughts are occurring 
without becoming involved with them, or, we can say, without 
following them. In meditation if a thought arises, we do not fol­
low it with the clarity of mind. There may be no thought arising 
and we are aware of the stillness of the mind. When a thought 
arises, we are aware that it is coming and going; but we simply 
let thoughts come and go and are aware of the stillness of the 
mind when there are no thoughts. We rest in the relaxed state of 
the natural clarity and awareness of the mind that observes itself. 
This is how we practice the Shamatha meditation, stillness of 
mind. 
The observer aspect of mind has two aspects. One is mindful­
ness or memory 23 which is the faculty of mind that allows us to 
continuously know what is occurring in mind and remember that 
we are meditating. If we forget, then we lose mindfulness and 
the meditation ends. Mindfulness is maintaining meditation all 
the time. The other aspect of the observer is awareness (Tib. se­
shin ), which sees what occurs in the mind, the coming and going 
of thoughts during the meditation. Awareness is maintained by 
93 
Shentong and Rangtong: Tu)o Views of Emptiness 
mindfulness. In the absence of mindfulness, thoughts come and 
go and there is no awareness of what they are. This is why the 
mind should be relaxed when doing meditation. It is not good to 
force the mind to be still; that will result only in poor meditation. 
If the mind is in a relaxed state, then we can engage in mindful­
ness and awareness without any stress. We can say it is like the 
attention a person uses when watching something happening far 
away. We are quite relaxed in watching distant objects and not 
tense while observing what is happening. Because tension will 
not result in good meditation, we need to be relaxed and have 
mindfulness to maintain the meditation and awareness of what 
is happening. 
The observer from a distance is like a spy. A spy goes along 
with others in order to keep an eye on them. If the spy watches 
too closely, they become suspicious and wonder why they are 
being watched. A spy therefore needs to be at a distance when 
watching what the others are doing. Mindfulness and awareness 
should be like that spy, watching from a distance and knowing, 
"This thought has come up and now it is gone" and so on. We 
are spying on the mind from a distance. We are not on the spot 
with thoughts, being very determined and forceful because this 
will cause the mind to lose its stability and clarity. 
b. THE NATURE OF THE SELF OF THE INDIVIDUAL 
Jamgon Kongtrul writes that the innate belief in a self can be 
categorized into two different kinds ofbelief. One is the belief in 
"I" and "me" and the other is the belief in "mine." Sometimes 
we might think of our mind as "me" and our body as "mine" only 
because there is no definite object for the self of the individual. 
Sometimes the body can be thought of as "mine" and the mind as 
"me" and sometimes the body as "me" and the mind as "mine" 
as in when we say "my mind." Or one might think of the body 
and mind together as "me" and material possessions as "mine." 
The belief in "mine" can be greatly generalized from very vast 
94 
The Egolessness if' the Individual 
things such as "my land," "my country," "my world" to the tini­
est things such as "my name." The reason there is no definite way 
to refer to a self and to mine is that the belief in "I" and "mine" 
is a fiction or a delusion. 
C. THE REASON TO NEGATE THE SELF 
The third point discusses why one has to abandon the belief 
in the self. The reason given is similar to Chandrakirti's reason­
ing which goes: When we believe that there is a self, when there 
is in fact no self, then automatically another is created and we 
have created the duality of self and other. Once we have this du­
alism of I and other, we feel that the self is something good and 
should be cherished. Once there is self-cherishing, there is at­
tachment to the self and aversion and rejection ofthat which be­
longs to others. This attachment to self results in pride, envy, 
anger and so on. As a result of the arising of these disturbing 
emotions we experience difficulties and suffering. Therefore we 
need to be able to eliminate and negate the belief in the selfofthe 
individual. 
Chandrakirti further argues, "When there is a belief in an "I" 
or a "me," then there is attachment to the idea of"I" and "me." 
As a result, the thought "mine" arises. The thought "mine" is the 
attachment to those things considered part of "1." Chandrakirti 
continues that this will give rise to difficulties because we may 
think, "Things have not gone well for me or for these things that 
are mine." Such ideas cause problems and suffering, and we can 
trace the root of all these problems and suffering to the attach­
ment to the idea of "I" and "mine." Therefore, we have to elim­
inate these beliefs. 
It is easy to refute logically the arbitrariness of the belief of 
"mine." For example, if we go into a shop that sells watches, and 
see someone drop a watch and break it, we think, "Oh, some­
body dropped their watch and it broke." without feeling any 
strong positive or negative emotion. But if our own watch has a 
95 
Shentong and Rangtong: Two Views rf Emptiness 
tiny scratch, we think, "Oh, I have a scratch on my watch" and 
this leads to a very unpleasant feeling. When someone else's 
watch falls and breaks there is no feeling, but we feel bad when 
our own watch has a little scratch. What is the difference between 
the two watches? The difference is the belief that the scratched 
watch is "mine." It is the belief in "mine" that gives rise to an 
unpleasant sensation. What justifies the idea of"my watch"? We 
cannot find the "my" in the watch; it is made of the same mate­
rial as the watch which broke. The "my" cannot be found any­
where in the watch, so the belief, "It is mine" does not exist in the 
watch. In fact, the idea "mine" has no reality and yet it causes 
suffering. 
To summarize, the root of suffering, the root of our difficult 
life problems, is the belief in the self. The root of our unhappiness 
and all our problems is believing that a self can possess things. 
The belief in possessions spreads to cover all manner of things 
like my family, my race, my country. When we hear that things 
go wrong in our neighborhood, we are unhappy and think, 
"Things are going wrong in my area. Something bad is happen­
ing in my country." This unpleasant sensation is due only to the 
belief in "my." If we are free of the belief in "my" and "mine," 
problems which come up will not be upsetting. 
d. EGOLESSNESS OF THE INDIVIDUAL 
IN THE DIFFERENT TRADITIONS 
The fourth point explains how the different traditions view 
egolessness. The four traditions are the Foundation vehicle 
schools of the Great Exposition and Sutra-followers and Ma­
hayana schools of the Mind-only, and the Middle-way schools. 
As we have already seen, each of these schools sees the egoless­
ness of phenomena quite differently. With respect to the egoless­
ness of the individual, the Great Exposition followers and 
Sautrantikas understand the egolessness of the individual, but un­
derstand only the more obvious level of the egolessness of phe-
96 
The Egolessness of the Individual 
nomena. The other two schools teach the obvious as well as the 
subtle levels of the egolessness of the phenomena. But in terms 
of the egolessness of the individual their teaching is the same. 
e. THE MIDDLE-WAY ANALYSES OF THE 
EGOLESSNESS OF THE INDIVIDUAL 
The fifth point describes the Middle-way view of the ego­
lessness of the individual. The Middle-way view is not based on 
experience, but rather on logical analysis. 
The Cart Analysis 
One of the teachings the Buddha gave on this topic was by 
using the example of a cart. Is there such a thing as a cart? Rel­
atively speaking, "Yes, it appears that there is a cart. It can be 
loaded with things, which are carried from one place to the next. 
It seems as if it does exist." Although it seems to exist in relative 
terms, in actual fact there is no such thing as "cart." Are the 
wheels the cart? No, they are not the "cart." Wheels can roll but 
do not fulfill all the functions of a cart. Is the axle the cart? No, 
it cannot fulfill the functions of a cart. Is the platform or bed that 
holds the load the cart? No, the platform cannot take things from 
one place to the next. The cart is composed of wheels, an axle, a 
platform and so on, but none of these parts is the cart. Is the cart 
separate from its parts? No, one cannot say this thing is the cart, 
and the parts are not the cart. 
Is the cart identical with the wheels and other parts? No, be­
cause each part has its own function. Looking at the wheels, one 
cannot say that the wheels are based upon the cart. Nor can one 
say that the carriage is based upon the wheels. Nor can one say 
that the shape of the entire object is the cart either because carts 
come in many different shapes and sizes. All the parts come to­
gether in the mind and one sees them as a whole and ascribes the 
name "cart" to that collection of parts that are able to fulfill the 
97 
Shentong and Rangtong: Two Views if Emptiness 
function of a cart. Therefore, we call it a "cart," but the true ex­
istence of "cart" cannot be found. 
We can obviously apply this similar analysis to the idea of a 
"self' to show it also is a mental concept, not an inherent exist­
ing thing. 
The Five Aggregates 
The five aggregates (Skt. skandhas) are form, sensation, iden­
tification, mental formation, and consciousness. Our mind is 
composed of the five aggregates and we may think of them as 
being the self. Looking at each aggregate, we can ask, "Is this 
the self?" No, it isn't. "Does the self own the aggregates?" No. 
"Is the self identical with the aggregates?" No. "Is it the shape or 
size or color of the aggregates that make up the self?" No. Rather, 
it is the collection of aggregates that carry out the function of 
thinking of "I" and are then ascribed the name "I.' In fact, there 
is no self or I that is identical to or separate from the aggregates. 
To give more detail to the argument that the self and the five 
aggregates are not the same, there are twenty views of the self as 
the five aggregates, each view being incorrect. These views are 
shown to be false when the self is refuted. The views that are in­
correct are: 
1.-5. Each of the five aggregates or skandhas are actually 
the self One might hold the view that the aggregate of 
"form" (our body) is the self, but it isn't. Similarly, one 
might hold the view that the "sensation" or "identifica­
tion," or "mental formation" or "consciousness" is the 
self. They aren't the self. Believing the self to be one of 
the aggregates creates five incorrect views that can be 
eliminated by realizing that the self doesn't truly exist. 
6.-1 0. The self is accompanied by each of the five aggre­
gates. One might hold the view that one of the five aggre-
98 
The Egolessness if the Individual 
gates supports the self; that self and form coexist, that self 
and sensations coexist, that self and identification coex­
ist, that self and mental formations coexist, or that self 
and consciousness coexist. All these views are wrong and 
can be eliminated realizing the emptiness of self. 
ll.-15. The aggregates are based upon the self One 
might hold the view that form is based upon the self, that 
sensations are based upon the self, that identification is 
based upon the self, that mental activities are based upon 
the self, or that consciousness is based upon the self. All 
these views are wrong and are eliminated by refuting the 
belief in the self. 
16.-20. The self is based on the five aggregates. One 
might hold the view that the aggregates are the foundation 
for the self. Is the self based upon form? Is it based upon 
sensations? Is it based upon identification? Is it based 
upon mental activities? Is it based upon consciousness? 
No. All these views are incorrect and are eliminated by re­
alizing the egolessness of self. 
We can go through each of these twenty views in relation to 
the aggregates and discover that, in fact, the self does not exist. 
Using the example of the chariot, we can analyze and see that 
there is no self in relation to the aggregates. Having understood 
that, we can meditate on the absence of a self, such as in the med­
itation instructions of Goenka, in which case one meditates on 
the body, working from the top of the body downwards, looking 
for the self. By practicing this meditation we develop the expe­
rience that there is no self. 
99 
Shentong and Rangtong: Two Views of Emptiness 
Meditation 24 
Many people are interested in doing meditation and in gain­
ing experience from it. We should avoid the obstacles of dullness 
of mind in meditation; the mind should be clear and not dull. We 
can also encounter the obstacle of an unstable or agitated mind, 
meaning that many thoughts arise in the mind. When many 
thoughts arise in the mind, we should notice them with mindful­
ness and awareness and be aware of these many thoughts. Hav­
ing identified this fact, we simply return to our meditation and 
remain in a clear and calm meditative state. 
When we are in a clear state of meditation, dullness or stupor 
can overcome the mind. We must first recognize this and then 
we must employ an antidote to bring the mind back to clarity. If 
we become aware that "I am going off into sleep," we should pull 
ourselves back into clear awareness. We should do this to avoid 
these two obstacles in meditation. The Buddha has taught that 
excitement of mind with too many thoughts and dullness of mind 
hamper meditation. We need to avoid these two conditions and 
remain in a clear meditation with mindfulness and awareness. 
There is also the physical posture for meditation, 25 which is 
taught in the texts. It is important not to be strict or tense with our 
posture in meditation. In sitting meditation we should be in a 
pleasant and comfortable state. It is important to be relaxed and 
to feel at ease. 
It is very good to meditate for short periods of time. We can 
sustain the meditation only if we do short sittings. Then, we 
should stop before the meditation becomes too difficult. The 
body can become uncomfortable too. There is no point in per­
sisting, thinking "Well, I must endure this." Sitting there endur­
ing the pain is not helpful. At that point, there is nothing wrong 
with stopping, stretching our legs, and making ourself comfort­
able again before continuing the meditation. 
100 
The Egolessness of the Individual 
3. EGOLESSNESS OF 
THE INDIVIDUAL AND PHENOMENA 
This section deals with what the egolessness of phenomena 
and the egolessness of the individual have in common. It is pre­
sented in five sections. 
a. THE TWO EGOLESSNESSES AS ONE OR SEPARATE 
Are the egolessness of self and egolessness of phenomena 
one or two different conditions? Both of these kinds of ego less­
ness are an absence of reality. The egolessness of phenomena 
means that phenomena have no true existence; the egolessness 
of the individual means that the individual has no true existence. 
They are the same in that both ofthem are an absence of true ex­
istence. 
These egolessnesses, however, can be divided into two in 
terms of what they are not. When we look at the individual, we 
see that the individual has no true reality. When we look at phe­
nomena in terms of the dharmadhatu, we discover phenomena 
have no true nature. So in these terms we have the division of 
emptiness into two kinds of egolessness or selflessness. 
b. THE PURPOSE FOR TWO-FOLD EGOLESSNESS 
Why is the egolessness of phenomena and of the individual 
taught as being different when their nature is the same, namely 
emptiness? 
There are many different kinds of individuals. Some have less 
diligence and less capacity to understand the dharma and they 
have many differing abilities and aspirations, so one dharma will 
not suffice to teach all individuals. The Buddha also taught on 
two different levels: the provisional level and the definitive level. 
The provisional level presented teachings in which the meaning 
was not obvious and had to be interpreted and the definitive level 
101 
Shentong and Rangtong: Two Views if Emptiness 
required no such interpretation. For example, the Buddha taught 
the Foundation teachings to those of lesser wisdom, diligence, 
and capacity. To those people who may not have had great faith 
or the ability to understand emptiness, the Buddha did not say, 
"This is what you must understand, believe, and practice. It will 
not be right if you don't." The Buddha didn't teach this way be­
cause these people still had faith and aspiration in the dharma. 
The Buddha rather gave teachings to these persons in accordance 
with their aspiration, wisdom, and diligence. The definitive 
meaning was only implied in these provisional teachings. The 
Buddha gave the definitive teachings to practitioners who had 
great aspiration, wisdom, and diligence. He did not withhold the 
complete meaning of the teaching. Therefore, they were given 
the definitive teachings exactly as they should be taught. 
The Foundation vehicle teachings were taught to those who 
did not have the intention to help other beings, but who were con­
cerned only with their own benefit. The Foundation vehicle was 
also taught to those who did not have the wisdom to understand 
the teachings entirely. Although these individuals did not have 
the wisdom to realize emptiness or the intention to benefit all 
other beings, they still had the aspiration to attain liberation from 
samsara. This can be explained by the fact that there are two ob­
scurations that prevent liberation: the obscuration of the disturb­
ing emotions and the obscuration of wisdom. In accordance with 
their aspiration, the Buddha taught the Foundation practitioners 
the methods to remove the obscuration of the disturbing emo­
tions. This meant that the Buddha taught the egolessness of the 
individual to these Foundation vehicle practitioners (the 
shravakas and pratyekabuddhas) as a method to eliminate the dis­
turbing emotions. 
For those who had the confidence to realize the ultimate truth 
of the teachings and who had the motivation to benefit all beings 
throughout space, the Buddha gave the Mahayana teachings. For 
those who were able to realize emptiness and had the necessary 
motivation, the Buddha taught egolessness of phenomena and 
the attitude of bodhichitta. 
102 
The Egolessness of the Individual 
C. REFUTING THE EXISTENCE OF SELF AND PHENOMENA 
The third point examines what is to be refuted in terms of the 
two egolessnesses. First, the self of the individual must be re­
futed because the self of the individual doesn't actually have are­
ality. Although there is no self, it seems to us as if it does exist. 
Therefore, as long as one is experiencing delusory appearances, 
one needs to go through the process of refuting the self of the in­
dividual even though it has no reality in the first place. 
Also, there is a belief in the reality of phenomena. This has 
no reality either. But to the mind that is in a state of delusion, 
there is the mental fabrication of the reality of phenomena. There­
fore, because one imagines that there is something that is not, 
one needs to refute that reality of phenomena, that self of phe­
nomena. 
What are being refuted here is the egolessness of phenomena 
and the egolessness of the individual. In spite of the fact that phe­
nomena and individual self have no existence of their own, the 
mind perceives that which doesn't exist (persons and things) as 
existing. Therefore, one needs to refute them because if they did 
exist, it would be impossible for them to become non-existent. 
Similarly, if they are really non-existent, one can't make them 
exist. But, because the self of phenomena and the individual are 
actually non-existent, one can refute them. One needs to refute 
them because there is this belief in something that does not exist 
as existing. One does that for the self of the individual and for the 
self of phenomena. It is not that there actually is anything there 
that one is denying. What one is denying is not there, but because 
there is this mistaken belief in the mind and one has to realize 
that one is in error, one goes through the process of refuting the 
self of phenomena and the self of the individual. 
103 
Shentong and Rangtong: Two Views of Emptiness 
d. How TO REFUTE EXISTENCE OF SELF AND PHENOMENA 
The fourth point explains how one goes about refuting the 
existence of phenomena and of the individual on the ultimate 
level of reality. We use the logic from the pramana ("valid cog­
nition"), which allows us to develop a conviction in the reality of 
egolessness. There are two kinds of logical proofs that can be 
used to establish egolessness of the individual and egolessness 
of phenomena: negative proofs and positive proofs. The nega­
tive proof establishes that something does not exist, whereas pos­
itive proof establishes that something does exist. 
There are two kinds of positive proofs: "proofthrough iden­
tity" and "proof through effect." The proof through effect re­
quires that the effect is different from the subject of discussion, 
therefore it is "a result," whereas the subject is called "the cause." 
For example, the positive proof that a fire on a mountain pass ex­
ists is the presence of smoke, which is the effect of the fire. 
Smoke is different from the fire, which is the cause of the smoke. 
In this way, inference is used to conclude that there is a fire when 
one sees the smoke, although the fire itself cannot be directly 
seen. This first example is the positive proof using the reasoning 
of cause and effect. 
The second positive proof is called "proof through identity" 
and it deals with something that arises because it is newly cre­
ated. If something had always existed, then it would be perma­
nent. However, if something such as a plant is newly created 
then it is impermanent and it must be the result of causes and 
conditions (a seed, right soil, fertilizer, warmth). When those 
causes and conditions are missing or incomplete, then that thing 
(the plant) will never appear or cease to exist. This proof con­
cerns the nature ofthe subject, a thing that is newly created. 
These are the two kinds of positive logical proofs that prove 
the presence and identity of something. When we are refuting the 
existence of the egolessness of phenomena and the egolessness 
of the individual, the negative proof is used. There are also two 
104 
The Egolessness of the Individual 
kinds of negative proofs. One negative proof is called "an ab­
sence of result." For example, we may conclude that because 
there is no smoke (the effect of fire) in a clump of trees, then 
there can be no fire (the cause ofthe smoke) there. Thus, the ab­
sence of smoke is a negative proof showing that there is no fire. 
The second type of negative proof deals with contradiction. For 
example, there is a contradiction between fire and water. For ex­
ample, if we see an ocean with nothing on it, we know there will 
be no fire there. The negative proof that there won't be a fire on 
an undisturbed ocean is that these two things are contrary to each 
other. 
These two kinds of positive and two kinds of negative proofs 
are used in logical reasoning. To prove the absence of a self, the 
positive proof is not used. Instead, we refute the existence of self 
and phenomena using both negative proofs: the absence of result 
(something connected with the subject) and the absence of iden­
tity (the presence of the opposite). 
e. MIDDLE-WAY ANALYSIS OF ULTIMATE TRUTH 
The fifth point deals with the actual logic used to examine 
the ultimate truth and this logic comes from the Middle-way tra­
dition. There are many different systems of reasoning used in this 
tradition to explain egolessness. 
First, there is reasoning showing non-dependence. One might 
think that something is born or arises and then comes to an end; 
that cessation is a result from a previous cause. However, logic 
shows that this is not an effect. Cessation does not depend upon 
a previous cause. Rather, it happens naturally and is not depend­
ent upon a previous cause. It is not an effect. 
Second, one might think that when appearances arise in the 
mind, they must be simultaneous. A cup cannot exist independ­
ently ofthe perception of the visual consciousness, otherwise the 
perception and the object would have to be simultaneous. This is 
the second of the five kinds of Middle-way logic. 
105 
Jhentong and Rangtong: Two Views of Emptiness 
The third kind of reasoning involves establishing how phe­
nomena are neither one nor many. If a thing has true existence, 
then it should be one single, indivisible thing. If we try to iden­
tify something as "one thing," we will fail because things are in­
finitely divisible. No matter how much we divide something, its 
parts continue to be subject to further division. They continue to 
have a top, bottom, right, left, and so on. It is not possible to 
prove anything as "one thing." Because that is the case, there 
cannot be the existence of "many" either. "Many" must be com­
posed of a collection of things that are "one." If it is not possible 
to establish anything as "one," then it is not possible for "many" 
to exist either. In this way, phenomena are neither one nor many; 
the nature of all things is emptiness, lack of any true reality. 
A fourth logical argument is employing the four extremes, 
called "refutation of birth from the four extremes." In the above 
discussion of the two positive and two negative proofs, these four 
points of Middle-way logic were already used. To use this same 
method of reasoning to prove the emptiness of phenomena using 
the aspect of birth and cessation we could reason: 
(i.) Phenomena cannot cease because they are not born, 
(ii.) Phenomena cannot be separate because they are not 
singular. 
(iii.) Phenomena cannot appear because they do not 
cease. 
(iv.) Phenomena cannot be nothing because they are not 
permanent. 
In the text The Wisdom of the Middle-way, Nagarjuna pre­
sented four kinds of reasoning. In one, he says that there is no 
cessation because there is no birth, i.e. if there is no birth, there 
cannot be cessation. Second, there cannot be many things be­
cause there is not one thing, or we could say if one thing does 
not exist, then there cannot be many things that exist. Third, there 
cannot be coming because there is no going, or one could say if 
106 
The Ego/essness of the Individual 
there is no going, there cannot be any coming. Fourth, there can 
also be no nihilism (a kind of nothingness) because there is no 
permanence, i.e. if there is no eternal existence, there can be no 
absence of existence. These are the four logical arguments pre­
sented in Nagarjuna's The Wisdom of the Middle-way. 
That completes the five sections on looking at both the ego­
lessness of phenomena and of the individual, together forming 
the third part on the section of egolessness; first the egolessness 
of phenomena, then the egolessness of the individual and then 
the egolessness ofboth phenomena and the individual. 
Questions 
Question: Would you say more about the seed and the plantaris­
ing independently? We had the point that where there is no fire 
there is no smoke and the less smoke, the less fire. If the seed 
and the plant arise separately, do they always arise one after the 
other? 
Rinpoche: The smoke from the fire and the plant and seed are 
different topics. Stating that smoke points to fire is a positive log­
ical reason, whereas ultimately there is no fire. The discussion 
of whether the sprout comes from the seed is carried out in order 
to see that the seed is different than the sprout; they are different. 
107 
Shentong and Rangtong: Two Views of Emptiness 
Nagarjuna 
Nagarjuna is said to have gone to the naga underworld where the 
nagas had preserved the Prajnaparamita texts on emptiness and 
he then brought them into our world. He is shown in the teach­
ing mudra surrounded by snakes (signs ofnagas) with a naga on 
the right offering him a treasure. 
108 
9 
The Two Middle-way Schools 
4. DEFINITIVE ANALYSES OF THE MIDDLE-WAY TRADITIONS 
Next we look at the analyses used in the Middle-way tra­
ditions. Whether in terms of the sixteen emptinesses or 
the two egolessnesses, these analyses are used to estab­
lish that things have no true existence, that the nature of phe­
nomena is emptiness. The two traditions in the Middle-way 
school are the Rangtong and the Shentong schools. 
A. THE RANGTONG SCHOOL 
When the Buddha was alive, he gave teachings on the Foun­
dation vehicle and on the emptiness of self. After he passed away 
(in 400 BCE), the Buddhists in India predominately taught and 
practiced the Foundation teachings. In about the first century CE 
Nagarjuna composed six main texts on the Middle-way on the 
emptiness of phenomena. The main text was The Wisdom of the 
Middle-way and the five others are considered branch or supple­
mentary texts. Nagarjuna's main disciple was Aryadeva. Both 
Nagarjuna and Aryadeva taught the Middle-way teachings on 
emptiness which later became known as the Rangtong school. 
After Nagarjuna's time, Buddhapalita wrote a commentary 
109 
Shentong and &ngtong: Two Views of Emptiness 
on Nagarjuna's main text to explain Nagarjuna's views. This ex­
planation became known as the Prasangika system of the Mid­
dle-way. Afterwards, another master Bhavaviveka criticized 
Buddhapalita, saying that he hadn't interpreted Nagarjuna's view 
correctly and wrote his own texts which became known as the 
Sutra-followers or Svatantrika tradition. Then in the seventh cen­
tury, Chandrakirti who lived after Bhavaviveka wrote his famous 
commentary on Nagarjuna 's text called Entering the Middle-way. 
Chandrakirti criticized Bhavaviveka's arguments and followed 
Buddhapalita's tradition, thus supporting the Prasangika tradi­
tion. Thus, two different systems developed within the Rangtong: 
that of the Prasangika and of the Svatantrika. The Svatantrikas 
were called "masters of the east" and include Bhavaviveka, 
Jnanagarba, and Shantarakshita. The main proponents of the 
Prasangika system were Buddhapalita and Chandrakirti. 
In Tibet the Prasangika is seen as a set of teachings higher 
than the Svatantrika teachings. "Higher" in this case doesn't 
mean superior, rather it is a matter of approach. To understand 
emptiness, we need to understand the view of both the Svatan­
trika and the Prasangika tradition. 
The Svatantrika View 
The Svatantrika system believes that the five skandhas are 
real and truly exist, with their nature being empty. This view 
clearly appears to be a contradiction because something (the 
skandhas) cannot be both existent and not existent at the same 
time. Therefore, the Svatantrikas postulated two levels of real­
ity: conventional or relative truth of the appearance of objects 
and the ultimate truth of the emptiness or nonexistence of the 
essence of the object. 
They explained this contradiction in terms of conventional 
truth (the appearance of relative phenomena) and the ultimate 
truth (the emptiness of phenomena). Phenomena exist on the con­
ventional level. It would be wrong to say that a phenomenon sim-
110 
The T1vo Middle-way Schools 
ply doesn't exist because on the conventional level appearances 
do occur. Similarly, you cannot speak of"existence" in terms of 
only ultimate truth; that would be incorrect. Because existence 
and non-existence are opposites, there has to be the division into 
two levels. Therefore, the Svatrantika tradition maintains that 
there is existence on conventional level and non-existence on the 
ultimate level of truth. This view is presented in Svatantrika texts 
such as the Entering the Middle-way (Skt. Madhyamika-lankara) 
which states that in terms of relative appearances there is the ex­
istence of things, and in terms of their ultimate nature there is 
non-existence or emptiness. Thus, in the Svatantika system there 
is the separation of the two truths with the conventional and ul­
timate truths being distinct from each other. 
The Prasangika Tradition 
The Prasangika tradition does not separate phenomena into 
relative and ultimate truth. While there are appearances, their na­
ture is emptiness. As things appear, they are at the same time 
empty. There is no need to separate the two truths because they 
are indivisible. Prasangikas hold that while everything is empty, 
this emptiness is not a complete void because the emptiness has 
the quality which allows the presence of appearances. The ex­
ample they give is when we are dreaming and we see a tiger in 
our dream. We can say the tiger is an actual appearance, but ob­
viously this tiger is empty or non-existent. 
While there is the appearance of the tiger, at the same time it 
is not existent. While there is the non-existence of the tiger (it 
never existed), it is present and appears. There is no need to sep­
arate between appearances and emptiness, existence and nonex­
istence in the Prasangika system because in this system the two 
truths (conventional and ultimate) are seen as indivisible. 
To summarize, the Middle-way school is divided into two 
main traditions-the Shentong and the Rangtong. The Rangtong 
tradition is further subdivided into two systems-the Svatrantika 
and the Prasangika. 
111 
S hen tong and Rangtong: Two Views of Emptiness 
B. THE SHENTONG SCHOOL 
The Shentong tradition belongs to the third and last turning 
of the wheel of dharma. We can find three major setbacks in the 
history ofthe spread of Buddhism. One major setback happened 
in the following way: At that time (around the 4th century CE) 
there were no drums or gongs in the monasteries, but only a 
ghandi (a long piece of wood). There were seven different ways 
of beating the ghandi to let practitioners know the different times 
of day, the time for taking the sojong vows and so on. In the Na­
landa Monastery, the ghandi was beaten in a certain way to an­
nounce that the non-Buddhist tradition had been completely 
defeated in a debate. So this certain style of beating would an­
nounce, "May many of the Buddha's teachings spread and may 
the tirthika (non-Buddhist) tradition be completely defeated." 
The story goes that a non-Buddhist beggar who begged for 
food at Nalanda every day heard the ghandi announcing, "May 
tirthikas be defeated." and wondered, "What are they saying?" 
He thought, "I cannot believe that these people are so malicious 
and nasty," and became very angry. The beggar had a companion 
and together they decided that they must put an end to this tradi­
tion of Nalanda University. One beggar practiced underground 
in complete darkness to attain the power of the sun while the 
other beggar begged for food to feed himself and his friend. 
Twelve years passed and the beggar providing the food said, "I 
have been feeding you for twelve years now. You must achieve 
the goal of your practice by tomorrow or you are a dead man." 
The beggar who was underground concentrated in a very focused 
manner and the next day he recited a mantra on a handful of earth 
which he then threw at Nalanda University. The earth burst into 
flames and the library caught fire. Water appeared and extin­
guished the fire, but many texts were spoiled and ruined. 
At that time there lived a nun called Salwai Tsultrim in Ti­
betan who grieved greatly at the loss of the texts in the library. 
She did not have the intellectual capacity herself to replace them 
112 
The Tivo Midd/e-wtry Schools 
and thought it would be best to give up her robes and to have 
sons who would help revive the Buddha-dharma. She had two 
sons named Asanga and Vasubandhu. In the Indian tradition, the 
son does the work his father did. Asanga and Vasubandhu had 
different fathers and each asked their mother what they should 
do. She answered, "I didn't bring you up for that reason. I want 
you to study the Dharma and revive it." They did their mother's 
bidding and Asanga meditated upon Maitreya while Vasubandhu 
studied the Abhidharma in Kashmir. 
Asanga was told to practice Maitreya, which he did in four 
three-year retreats in a cave. After the first three years, he 
thought, "I have gained no results from my practice and should 
give up." He left his retreat and came across a man who was rub­
bing a large lump of iron. Asanga asked, "What are you doing?" 
The man answered, "This big lump of iron is useless, but if I keep 
rubbing it, I can wear it down to make a needle and sew my 
clothes." Asanga saw the diligence of this man and thought, "I 
am trying to receive the blessings of Maitreya and should have 
more diligence than that." He did another three-year retreat, but 
again felt that he had accomplished nothing. He thought, "Six 
years have gone by and I am going to give up." He went out and 
came across a man who was rubbing a large rock on a mountain. 
When Asanga asked what he was doing, the man answered, "My 
house is on the other side of this and this rock is blocking off the 
sun. If I keep rubbing it, the mountain will wear away and the 
sun will shine on my house." Asanga thought, "So much dili­
gence! I should have more than that because I am trying to prac­
tice Maitreya." He returned to another three-year retreat, and 
again felt that he had accomplished nothing after nine years of 
practice. The same thing happened the third time, and Asanga 
went into retreat a fourth time. 
After completing the fourth retreat, Asanga thought, "Twelve 
years have passed and still I have no results." He went out and 
saw a dog with many sores that were full of worms and maggots. 
This dog was barking and tried to bite Asanga, buf Asanga felt 
113 
Shentong and Rangtong: Two Vie1JJS of Entptiness 
deep compassion for the dog because it was suffering so much 
pain and anger. He thought that he must take the worms out of the 
sores, otherwise the dog would die. Because he also did not want 
to harm the worms, he cut off a piece ofhis own flesh upon which 
he could lay the worms to nourish them. He decided to lift the 
worms out with his tongue because he didn't want to hurt the 
worms by pulling them out with his fingers. He closed his eyes 
and knelt down to touch the worms with his tongue and instead 
it touched the ground. Surprised, he looked up and saw the Bud­
dha Maitreya standing before him. He told Maitreya, "I have had 
such a difficult time! I have been practicing for twelve years and 
you never appeared. Why?" Maitreya answered, "I always had 
compassion for you, but you couldn't see me because you were 
obscured by your karma. Now, because you felt so much com­
passion for this dog, it removed your obscurations and negative 
karma so you are now able to see me." 
Maitreya accepted Asanga as his pupil and took him to his 
pure realm called Tushita. Asanga stayed in Tushita for a long 
time and received the teachings which are now called The Five 
Texts ofMaitreya. 26 
The last of these five texts is The Uttaratantra Shastra which 
presents the Shentong teachings in the form of seven main vajra 
topics. When Asanga returned to the world, he told Vasubandhu 
(who had been studying the Abhidharma with Sankabhadra) that 
he had received these very profound teachings. At first Va­
subandhu did not acknowledge that his brother had received these 
Mahayana teachings from Maitreya, but later repented. Then he 
received and studied these teachings of Maitreya, so that both 
Asanga and Vasubandhu spread them. In particular, The Ut­
taratantra Shastra, which became the transmission of the Shen­
tong tradition of the Middle-way school was spread. 
What is taught in the Shentong tradition? The first major 
teaching of the Shentong is that all phenomena are mind. This 
view holds that all things are created by the mind. There is noth­
ing that exists separate from the mind. Because all appearances 
114 
The Tlvo Middle-wqy Schools 
are the mind, nothing has an existence of its own. Not only do ob­
jects have no true existence, but the perceiver of objects has no 
existence either. Since both subject and object have no true exis­
tence, both phenomena and the mind itself have no true existence 
either. When we accept this view, we see that the true nature of 
phenomena is emptiness. In summary, the teachings of the Shen­
tong tradition hold that there is no reality to outer phenomena 
and no reality to the mind. 
The Uttaratantra Shastra presents this teaching in seven top­
ics called "vajra" points because they are so profound. The first 
vajra topic is the cause of enlightenment which is the Buddha. 
From the Buddha comes the second vajra topic, the teachings of 
the Buddha or the Dharma. Because there is the Dharma, the third 
vajra topic is the companions on the path or the sangha. Due to 
the sangha, we realize the fourth vajra topic that all beings pos­
sess Buddha-essence or Buddha-nature. The fifth vajra topic is 
that because all sentient beings have Buddha-nature, when this 
Buddha-nature is purified of the afflictions that obscure it, en­
lightenment is attained. The sixth topic is having attained en­
lightenment all the qualities of the Buddha, such as the ten 
powers, the four fearlessnesses, the 32 major and 80 secondary 
signs will flourish, so this sixth topic concerns the qualities of 
enlightenment. Finally, the seventh vajra topic is that once one 
possesses these positive qualities, as a Buddha one will engage in 
activity that will benefit other sentient beings. 
Of these seven topics, the most important one is the fourth 
vajra topic on Buddha-nature. The Shentong tradition holds that 
there is the "element" (Skt. dhatu) or Buddha-nature (Skt. tatha­
gata-garbha), also known as the dharmadhatu, and this element 
contains all the qualities of Buddhahood and its nature is empti­
ness. Buddha-nature is present within all beings at all times. It is 
realized at the attainment of enlightenment. But Buddha-nature 
is not the same as a permanent or eternal self (Skt. atman) posited 
by many Hindu religions. It is not the self, because the self is 
thought of as a real entity, whereas the Buddha-nature does not 
115 
Shentong and Rangtong: Two Views of Emptiness 
exist as an entity. Rather, Buddha-nature is devoid of its own na­
ture. It is empty. Therefore, it is not the same as a self. By re­
moving the obscurations and by realizing the Buddha-nature, 
living beings will achieve Buddhahood. 
i. THREE PHASES OF MANIFESTATION 
When Buddha-nature is obscured by the afflictions, Buddha­
nature does not manifest. There are three phases of this manifes­
tation of Buddha-nature: the state of impurity, the state of partial 
purification, and the state of complete purity. The state of impu­
rity is that of ordinary beings, in whom Buddha-nature and all 
the enlightened qualities of mind are completely obscured by the 
disturbing emotions. When ordinary beings have reached the 
level of a bodhisattva (having attained the first bodhisattva level) 
and they have removed many obscurations, they are partially pu­
rified through practice. The state of perfect purification occurs 
only when all obscurations are completely removed at the state 
of Buddhahood. 
ii. EXAMPLES OF BUDDHA-NATURE 
The aspiration to practice the dharma to attain wisdom and 
develop the enlightened qualities is present within Buddha-na­
ture, and this nature lies within all living beings. It is, however, 
obscured. In the Uttaratantra Shastra, nine examples are given 
to illustrate how the qualities of Buddha-nature are present within 
ordinary beings but are obscured. For example: 
The statue of a Buddha enclosed within a lotus. In this ex­
ample, one cannot see the Buddha. One can only see the petals. 
Once the petals are removed, the Buddha becomes visible. In the 
same way, all the qualities of Buddhahood are present in beings, 
but they are not seen because they are obscured. Once the disturb­
ing emotions that obscure the Buddha-nature are removed, one 
116 
The Two Middle-wqy Schools 
sees the Buddha-nature and all the qualities of Buddhahood. 
A lump of gold lying in a dump. Suppose once, many years 
ago someone had been carrying a lump of gold and lost it beside 
the street. The lump of gold is gradually covered over with 
garbage and dirt. Then suppose a poor man comes along and 
builds his shack over the spot where the gold is. Even though 
there is a lump of gold in the ground unchanged over time, right 
below his floor, he remains poor. He doesn't have to look any­
where else to become free from poverty, but he is not aware of it 
and continues to suffer. 
Then suppose there is a clairvoyant person who notices how 
this poor man is suffering and sees that he is living right above a 
lump of gold. The clairvoyant tells this man, "All you have to do 
is dig up the ground beneath your floor. You will find gold and 
become free from your poverty." The poor man does as he is told, 
finds the gold, and is liberated from the suffering of poverty. 
These are two of the examples that illustrate how Buddha­
nature is present, but obscured within ordinary beings. As in these 
examples, Buddha-nature has been present within ourselves for 
hundreds of thousands of lifetimes, even though we have not 
been able to perceive it. There is nothing wrong with the Buddha­
nature. The Buddha-nature has no faults. It is simply obscured 
by the disturbing emotions. Because it is obscured, we do not 
perceive any of the benefits of the Buddha-nature but rather, we 
experience the problems and suffering of samsara. The Buddha 
saw that beings suffer and are not aware of the Buddha-nature 
within, so he taught that we have Buddha-nature within us and 
that to expose it, we must remove the. disturbing emotions by 
practicing diligently. By removing the disturbing emotions, Bud­
dha-nature will manifest, possessing all the qualities of Buddha­
hood, and we will become free from the suffering of samsara. 
The Shentong tradition teaches that all beings possess Bud­
dha-nature and it is this Buddha-nature which allows us to 
117 
Shentong and Rangtong: Two Views of Emptiness 
achieve Buddhahood. Thus the qualities of Buddhahood are pres­
ent within all beings. We can find these teachings of the Shentong 
tradition in the Uttaratantra Shastra of Maitreya. 
iii. THE DIFFICULTY OF PERCEIVING BUDDHA-NATURE 
In The Compendium of Knowledge, Jamgon Kongtrul states 
that the Shentong tradition presents the definitive teaching on 
Buddha-nature, but that it is very difficult to comprehend and to 
realize by ordinary beings, shravakas, pratyekabuddhas and those 
beginning on the bodhisattva path. To realize Buddha-nature, one 
has to study the teachings of the great treatises of the Shentong 
tradition. We should read and study these teachings ourselves; 
therefore Jamgon Kongtrul does not go into this topic in detail in 
the text but goes on to the next topic. 
5. UNION OF THE PROFOUND VIEW AND VAST CONDUCT 
The first four sections on egolessness were the egolessness of 
phenomena, the egolessness of the individual, and the ego less­
ness of both phenomena and the individual in the different Rang­
tong and the Shentong traditions. This fifth section deals with the 
union of "the two chariots," which are "the tradition of the pro­
found view" and "the tradition of vast conduct." These are the 
teachings on emptiness of Nagarjuna (profound view) and of 
Asanga (vast conduct). 
We can look at these two views and take the stand that Nagar­
juna 's view is correct and Asanga 's view is incorrect, or we can 
consider Asanga 's view as correct and Nagarjuna 's view as in­
correct. Jamgon Kongtrul, however, says that this is not the way 
to look at this issue at all. We should not think, "One side is cor­
rect, therefore the other side must be wrong." Instead, we should 
realized these two views are a unity with neither side being right 
or wrong. 
The two traditions should be seen as one. Thus, we should 
118 
The Two Middle-JVt?_Y Schools 
see Nagarjuna 's view as free from error and a tradition that we 
should learn and contemplate. Having learned and contemplated 
Nagarjuna's tradition, we should also practice it. We should also 
see that Asanga 's tradition is free from error. Being free from 
error, it is a tradition that we should also learn and contemplate. 
Having learned and contemplated Asanga 's tradition, we should 
also practice it. In fact, Nagarjuna's tradition helps us understand 
Asanga's tradition because it clarifies Asanga's view, and 
Asanga's view helps us understand Nagarjuna's view. Therefore, 
we should regard both traditions to be equally valid. Some 
dharma masters described the dharma as a lump of molasses, 
which tastes sweet wherever you taste it. It would not be correct 
to think that one part of molasses is different or superior to an­
other other; instead, we should take both traditions as being 
equally valuable. 
The masters who founded these two traditions were foretold 
in an indisputable prophecy from the Buddha. The Buddha said, 
"From the southern land ofVeda there will come a monk called 
Naga." Because this is a definite prophecy, there is no reason to 
doubt the authenticity of Nagarjuna. The Buddha also said that 
sooner or later Asanga would come. Furthermore, he said that 
Nagarjuna would be on the first bodhisattva level, called "per­
fect joy." He also said that Asanga would attain the third bod­
hisattva level, called "radiance." Both masters were not ordinary 
beings, but were on the ten bodhisattva levels of the noble ones. 
Since the Buddha prophesied the appearance ofboth masters, we 
cannot say that the one is good and the other is bad. 
Not only that, but both of these great masters had great spir­
itual accomplishments. Nagarjuna lived for 900 years, Asanga 
lived for 150 years. Their greatness has not been questioned by 
any of the major dharma traditions. Nagarjuna and Asanga are 
referred to as "the adornments of the world" because they clari­
fied the Buddha's teachings. They are also called "the great char­
iots" because they spread the Buddha's teachings. Their teachings 
and views were both outstanding. 
119 
Shentong and Rangtong: Two Views rif Emptiness 
Some masters claim that Nagarjuna's teachings are good and 
Asanga 's are not. Some say that Asanga 's teachings are superior 
to Nagarjuna's. Some claim that the Shentong is superior to the 
Rangtong or vice versa. The people who argue in this manner are 
not correct because they have not had the good fortune to be able 
to learn and contemplate the dharma teachings properly and at­
tain the necessary understanding to evaluate them. 
Jamgon Kongtrul writes that we should understand the tex­
tual tradition ofboth Nagarjuna and Asanga thoroughly and ac­
curately. We need to understand Asanga 's and Nagarjuna 's texts 
clearly and not conclude, "What Nagarjuna teaches is the same 
as what Asanga teaches." This is not making an effort to under­
stand both traditions clearly. We should instead study both views 
separately, as they are. 
Nagarjuna 's teachings deal primarily with emptiness while 
Asanga 's teachings deal primarily with Buddha-nature, luminous 
clarity, and wisdom. Nagarjuna wrote commentaries on the first 
turning of the wheel of dharma (such as his Letters of Advice), on 
the middle turning of the wheel of dharma (texts on logical analy­
sis and commentaries on the Middle-way reasoning), and on the 
last turning of the wheel of dharma (in his Praises to the Dhar­
madhatu). Asanga wrote the five texts ofMaitreya and five texts 
on the bodhisattva levels, a compilation on the Abhidharma, and 
a compilation on the three vehicles to make a total of 12 texts. Va­
subandhu wrote eight works, which makes 20 yakaranas in all. 
Although Nagarjuna taught emptiness while Asanga taught 
Buddha-nature, clarity, and wisdom, both of these masters of­
fered an explanation ofthe Middle-way. The Middle-way is the 
ultimate meaning ofboth traditions. If we can study, understand, 
and realize these traditions, we will be free of making false im­
putations (that is saying Asanga or Nagarjuna said such and such 
when they actually didn't say this) and be free of false denials 
(that is saying Nagarjuna or Asanga did not say such and such 
when they actually did). We will be free from these errors and 
have a good understanding of both traditions. 
120 
The '/}vo Middle-Jvqy Schools 
lfwe can be free from false imputations and denials through 
understanding these traditions, we will possess "the eyes of wis­
dom." We will have the understanding that is stainless and free 
from misconceptions of the view of all of the sutras and tantras 
that the Buddha taught. With this understanding we will be able 
to explain them to others. 
There are many aspects to the teachings of these two tradi­
tions. Sometimes there are provisional teachings on the relative 
level and sometimes there are definitive teachings on the ulti­
mate level. Sometimes the teaching deals with what is obvious or 
evident (an external level of teaching) while other teachings will 
be subtle and deeper. Some teachings are concerned with cutting 
through conceptualization and others are concerned with the 
meaning of meditation and so on. lfwe can understand and real­
ize all these aspects ofboth traditions, then we will also be able 
to understand the sutras and tantras without error or contradic­
tion. We won't think, "Oh the sutras are right but the tantras are 
wrong." We also won't think, "The tantras are right but the sutras 
are wrong." If we understand these two traditions perfectly, we 
will not encounter these faults. 
Through this understanding, we can be free of the imputa­
tions of the ordinary mind. What we should understand is the 
Buddha's view. We should not impose our notions created from 
our own concepts upon Buddha-dharma. Therefore, we need to 
understand the traditions of the Rangtong and Shentong. If we 
don't understand the Rangtong tradition, we will have attachment 
to things as if they had a true existence. Therefore we need to ex­
amine and understand the Svatrantika and the Prasangika tradi­
tions ofthe Rangtong. Having understood the absence of reality, 
we go on to the ultimate aspect in which there isn't just plain 
emptiness but there is Buddha-nature, clarity, and ultimate wis­
dom, as explained in the Shentong tradition. The Shentong tra­
dition, therefore, clarifies the Rangtong teachings, and the 
Rangtong teachings clarify the Shentong teachings. Thus both 
assist each other. We can sec that there is no contradiction be­
tween them, but that they mutually assist each other. 
121 
Shenton!!, and RanJ?,tOIIJ!,: Two Views if Emptiness 
Questions 
Question: How can one say that because you do not experience 
something, it doesn't happen? Through using logic we know that 
certain things can happen. We are here in this teaching now, but 
that doesn't mean that downstairs something else isn't going on. 
The fact that we are here while it is happening doesn't mean that 
the things we are not experiencing are not happening. 
Rinpoche: There are the other things happening because there 
are the latencies in the ground consciousness. The general teach­
ings describe six consciousnesses (the five sensory conscious­
nesses and the mental consciousness) that experience 
perceptions. There is also a classification into eight conscious­
nesses. The seventh is the ••afflicted consciousness," which is a 
belief in a self. We always think, .. 1 am. I exist." The seventh con­
sciousness is latent and always present and clings to a self all the 
time, day and night, while eating, while drinking. It is persist­
ently there at all times. There is also the eighth consciousness, 
the ••ground consciousness" holding all our latencies and from 
which all the things we experience arise. lfl go from Kathmandu 
to London, I get in a plane and think, .. I am going to London." 
Then I think, .. Now I am on my way to London" and later, ··Now 
I have arrived in London." I don't think, .. 1 have left Kathmandu. 
Kathmandu has disappeared and is no longer there." Rather, ••I 
have left Kathmandu, coming to London flying up here above 
the clouds" with all expectations. I arrive upon the latency in the 
ground consciousness. 
Question: Rinpoche, could you explain how things arise in the 
eighth consciousness when it is in the sixth consciousness that 
everything appears. 
Rinpoche: Appearances arise through latencies or karmic im­
prints. In any life you have all sets of latencies in your ground 
consciousness. What you do not have in your ground conscious-
122 
The Two Middle-1vqy Schools 
ness will not appear. You can't have a cold fire appearing because 
there isn't the latency of a cold fire; only a hot fire can appear. So, 
there are all these latencies present and they can arise and be 
grasped with the five or six consciousnesses; what is in the 
ground consciousness is perceived by the six consciousnesses. 
It is like a movie projector. What is in the projector will shine 
on the screen; what is not in the movie projector will not shine on 
the screen. So, whatever is in that machine will appear vividly on 
the screen. 
123 
5 hen tong and &mgtong: TJPO Views of Emptiness 
Asanga 
Asanga was the founder of the Yogachara school which came to 
be known as the third turning of the wheel of dharma. It is said 
that he meditated on the Buddha Maitreya for 12 years and then 
was able to meet him. There he was given the Five Treatises of 
Maitreya which became the "School of the Vast View." 
124 
10 
The View of the Tantras 
The sixth chapter, entitled "The View of the Tantras" is di­
vided into two parts. First is the general explanation given 
by masters of the Middle-way and second is a particular 
explanation given by Gargyi Wangpo (the Eighth Tai Situpa) 
VI. THE VIEW OF THE TANTRAS 
A. GENERAL EXPLANATION OF THE MIDDLE-WAY MASTERS 
What is the relation between Rangtong and Shentong in the 
tantras? We might ask, "Which Middle-way view is closest to the 
teachings of the tantras in the Vajrayana?" There are different 
masters and each master has his or her own way of explaining 
what the view is in the tantras. However, the major view is that 
the tantric teachings correspond with the final turning of the 
wheel of dharma. Jamgon Kongtrul writes that most of the In­
dian texts also teach that the tantras are part of the last turning of 
the wheel of dharma. In Tibet many masters and scholars pre­
sented their own individual view about this. 
The Rangtong tradition says that the subject of the tantras is 
great bliss used as a method; the object is emptiness free from 
conceptual fabrication. This is not different from the Prajna-
125 
Shentong and RanJ!,!Onf!,: Tu1o Views of Emptiness 
paramita teaching on emptiness in the sutra tradition. Therefore, 
the Prajnaparamita and tantra teachings are the same when it 
comes to the object or purpose of these teachings. 
Some masters say that there is no difference between the 
tantra view and the teachings of emptiness. Others say that the 
teachings are not the same, that there isn't just emptiness free 
from conceptualization, but that the tantra view is different. They 
say that the tantra view is that emptiness possesses aspects and 
that everything can arise in emptiness. 
It is important to understand that there are slight differences 
between the sutras and tantras. Once somebody told me, "When 
you listen to the Buddhist teachings, you hear teachings on empti­
ness, Shamatha meditation, love, compassion and so on. This is 
very good, but when you see Buddhists practicing, it is not the 
same. In monasteries drums are beaten, horns are blown, and 
there are strange deities. You don't actually see Buddhists prac­
tice what they are teaching." It is true. This is how it appears to 
a newcomer. But, it is important to learn and understand the dif­
ferences between the sutras and tantras exactly for this reason. 
In the practice of the dharma, the goal is to realize the true na­
ture of phenomena and to attain a high state of wisdom. In the Ti­
betan tradition the actual practice is done through the practice of 
the tantras. There are two methods in the tantras: the path of lib­
eration and the path of methods. In the path of liberation one 
looks directly at the mind, at its true nature, which slowly be­
comes more and more clear. In the path of methods, various 
methods and yogic practices are used to increase the clarity and 
stability of the mind so one can look into the nature of mind more 
easily. 
In the Vajrayana we meditate on deities and on the nature of 
these deities. What we wish to realize in deity practice is the dhar­
madhatu, the emptiness of phenomena inseparable from wisdom 
and luminous clarity. This is the ultimate wisdom of Buddha­
hood, the Buddha-nature that is present within all beings. This is 
the nature of the yidam deities that are meditated on who are not 
126 
The Vinv of the Tantras 
perceived as external, existent beings. They are seen as internal 
because the deities that we are meditating on are actually our own 
nature. These deities include Chakrasamvara, Hevajra, Va­
jravarahi and so on. In tantra practices, one's own mind is that of 
the deity, and one meditates on this pure nature. In these prac­
tices one imagines one's own body to be that of the deity so that 
one does not have an ordinary and impure body, but rather one 
possesses the stainless body of the deity during the meditation. 
We meditate on the pure body, speech, and mind of the deity, 
because the goal in dharma practice is to eliminate the obscura­
tion of the afflictions and the obscuration to knowledge. We wish 
to eliminate these impurities, and by meditating on our nature as 
being the pure nature of the deity (the pure body, speech and 
mind), the impurities will naturally dissolve. If we simply strive 
to eliminate directly the disturbing emotions and the obscuration 
of knowledge, they will not vanish. By meditating on the pure 
form, the impurities will naturally be eliminated. Not only that, 
but when imagining ourself in this pure form, we radiate light 
rays from our heart, which invites the yidam deities to come and 
merge into ourselves. We experience cessation in the mind when 
we do this. This practice creates a tendency in the mind towards 
purity and, to some extent, this is what dispels the impurity of 
our perceptions. 
Also, during tantric practice there are all kinds of different 
perceptions of many things: various visual images, pleasant or 
unpleasant sounds, drums, gongs, unusual smells of incense and 
so on. These appearances aid us in meditation. To engage the 
body, speech, and mind in the practice, there is also the recitation 
of the mantra, which isn't normal speech with a particular mean­
ing. Rather it is a sound. The Sanskrit meaning of any mantra can 
be translated, but the masters recommend not to translate the 
mantras, but to leave them in Sanskrit. These mantras are not or­
dinary speech: they are special sounds that inspire us and sup­
port our practice. 
127 
Shentong and Rangtong: T1vo Vie1vs of Emptiness 
It is said that the view of the tantras accords with the Shen­
tong view. The Rangtong view is best for understanding empti­
ness, for analyzing phenomena, and for realizing emptiness. But, 
thinking about emptiness is not sufficient when it comes to med­
itation. The Shentong teachings on the presence of clarity and 
wisdom are beneficial for the actual practice of meditation in the 
tantras. Therefore, it is said here that the tantric view is the Shen­
tong view, which can be understood from texts like the Ut­
taratantra Shastra. The Uttaratantra Shastra is often described 
as the teaching that joins the sutras with the tantras. Jamgon 
Kongtrul concludes that the view of the tantras is the view of the 
Shentong tradition. 
8. THE EXPLANATION OF GARGYI WANGPO, IN PARTICULAR 
Next is a description of the view of Lama Gargyi Wangpo, 
also known as Chogyi Nangwa and Situ Chogyi Jungne, the 
Eighth Tai Situpa. This section gives his specific explanation on 
the particular features of the Middle-way view in the context of 
the tantra. 
1. THE UNION OF APPEARANCES AND EMPTINESS 
In the sutra tradition, the understanding of emptiness that is 
beyond conceptual fabrications is arrived at through intellectual 
reasoning. We use logical reasoning to analyze the two egoless­
nesses or the sixteen emptinesses to gain an understanding of 
emptiness. Although we cannot directly see the emptiness of ex­
ternal phenomena, by using inference we can come to the con­
clusion that external phenomena are devoid of their own nature; 
that their nature is emptiness. We can gain certainty through log­
ical analysis, which is the result of gaining definite understand­
ing of emptiness through reasoning. We gain certainty that 
emptiness is the nature of phenomena. Once we have this cer­
tainty, we meditate on the basis ofthat certainty. In this way, our 
128 
The Vinv q( the Trantras 
understanding of the nature of phenomena becomes clearer and 
clearer and clearer until we reach the first bodhisattva level. At 
this stage, we directly see the nature of phenomena. This sutra 
tradition has the view ofthe union of appearances and emptiness; 
meaning there are appearances but their nature is emptiness. 
Thus, we discover a union of appearance and emptiness, as in the 
Rangtong tradition. 
2. THE UNION OF CLARITY AND EMPTINESS 
The Rangtong tradition also holds that there is also the "union 
of luminous clarity and emptiness" meaning that emptiness has 
luminous clarity. Thus, by believing in the union of luminous 
clarity and emptiness, the Rangtong tradition believes the same 
thing as the Shentong tradition. 
3. THE UNION OF BLISS AND EMPTINESS 
The tantras teach the union of bliss and emptiness, meaning 
that there is emptiness but its nature is bliss. The tantra tradition 
employs techniques tq move the energy in the body. Within the 
body there are subtle channels (Tib. tsa) in which there is the 
movement of subtle energy called prana in Sanskrit and lung or 
"winds" in Tibetan. There are also chakras or "wheels" which 
are made up of the channels coming together. In yogic methods 
of the Vajrayana called tummo, warmth is created which invades 
the chakras and moves along the subtle channels, thus pervading 
the entire body. The result of this is the feeling of extreme bliss 
throughout the entire body. If one becomes attached to that bliss, 
this will impede one's spiritual practice. Instead, one should see 
that the nature of this bliss as emptiness. It is easier to identify 
bliss than it is to identify emptiness. Therefore, by creating bliss 
that pervades the entire body and by recognizing the emptiness 
of this bliss, one can realize the union of bliss and emptiness. 
This is the method of realizing emptiness used within the tantra 
129 
Shmtong and Rangtong: Two Views of E111ptiness 
tradition. 
This second method for realizing emptiness is called the 
method of "complete grasping" and "subsequent destruction or 
dissolution." "Complete grasping" is the method for completely 
identifying the union of bliss and emptiness. "Subsequent de­
struction" is the merging of everything into emptiness. 
There are also other methods used in the tantra tradition for 
realizing emptiness. In relation to the true nature there is medi­
tation on realizing the interdependence of phenomena by using 
the method of"that which purifies" and "that which is purified." 
These various methods just described have been put forward by 
the Eighth Tai Situpa. Tai Situpa was prophesied by Pad­
masambhava (Tib. Guru Rinpoche) who predicted, "Among the 
lamas there will be six who have the name of "Dharma" (Tib. 
cho) and six who have the name "Perna" or lotus." So Chogyi 
Jungne was the sixth or the last of the lamas who had the name 
"Dharma" within their name, and he was the Eighth Tai Situpa. 
Questions 
Question: How does one know which one to do, the path of lib­
eration or the path of methods? 
Rinpoche: The path of liberation is an easier way of practicing, 
so one should do that. If the opportunity comes to practice the 
path of methods, one should take advantage of that opportunity. 
130 
11 
The View of the Birthless Union 
VII. THE VIEW OF THE BIRTHLESS UNION 
The seventh and last subdivision of this text deals with the 
view of the union which is birthless, the union of appear­
ances and emptiness, the union of luminous clarity and 
emptiness, and the union of bliss and emptiness. If we have 
gained this view, theQ we will reach realization through our prac­
tice because this is the nature of phenomena. If emptiness were 
not the true nature of phenomena, we would not be able to real­
ize it. But, because the true nature of phenomena is the union of 
appearances and emptiness, we will be able to realize this union 
through practice. For example, charcoal is black and that is the 
nature of charcoal. There is nothing else you can do about it. No 
matter how much you try, you cannot wash charcoal white. You 
can wash charcoal 100 times and it will remain black. Similarly, 
if the nature of phenomena were not emptiness, no matter how 
much we practiced, it would not be possible to realize emptiness. 
The Three Wisdoms 
The Buddha and great masters taught about the nature of phe­
nomena on the basis of direct realization, not logical analysis and 
131 
Shentong and Rangtong: Two Vie1vs of Emptiness 
inference. If emptiness were not the true nature of phenomena, 
then the Buddha's words would not be correct and one could 
not attain realization following the Buddhist path. If emptiness 
were not the true nature of phenomena, then logical reasoning 
would not be correct and we could never prove the empty na­
ture of phenomena through logic. But, it is possible to prove 
and realize this fact because emptiness is the true nature of phe­
nomena. Since emptiness is the nature of phenomena, we can 
make progress and realize emptiness through practice. If empti­
ness were not the actual true nature of phenomena, it would be 
an illusion and spiritual practice would bring no results. As 
emptiness is the nature of phenomena, we can attain the result 
through study and practice, but we may ask, "How do we do 
this?" 
We make progress on the path through the development of 
the three kinds of knowledge (Skt. prajna). First, we need to 
learn what was taught by reading the sutras that were taught by 
the Buddha and by reading the commentaries that were taught 
by the great masters in India and in Tibet. By studying the 
teachings, we will become familiar with the teachings on empti­
ness. From this study the wisdom of the teachings on empti­
ness anses. 
Is it enough to just study the teachings on emptiness? No. 
We also need to examine the teachings to see what they really 
mean. Through our own intelligence and understanding we 
must examine and contemplate the teachings until we gain an 
understanding for ourselves of the meaning of the teachings. 
Once we gain understanding of the teachings, we will have the 
wisdom that comes through contemplation. Then we will know, 
"This is what is meant by emptiness. It is the same as the nature 
of phenomena." 
Is it sufficient to just contemplate these truths? No, because 
we need the wisdom that comes only through meditation. For 
example, if we have a pain in our hand and read texts that teach 
132 
The Vim' of the Birthless Union 
that everything is emptiness, our hand will continue to hurt. 
Merely repeating to ourself that everything is empty while we 
stick a needle in our hand will still cause pain because we are ha­
bituated through all of our lifetimes to believe in the reality of 
things. Just knowing the teachings on emptiness is not enough; 
we have to realize emptiness through the practice of meditation. 
It is through the practice of meditation based upon knowledge of 
what we have learned through analysis that we can gain the di­
rect experience and realization, namely that emptiness is the true 
nature of phenomena. 
When we have developed direct realization of the true nature 
of phenomena through meditation, we will also understand phe­
nomena on the conventional level. The text reads: "Once we have 
realized the true nature of phenomena, spontaneously there will 
be wisdom which is free of ignorance concerning cause and ef­
fect." When we realize that the nature of all appearances is empti­
ness, that doesn't mean that appearances arise without a cause or 
reason. But once we have directly realized the true nature of phe­
nomena is emptiness, the obscurations of belief in a solid self 
and in the reality of phenomena are removed. Once these are dis­
pelled, our wisdom can then see how phenomena naturally and 
spontaneously arise. Upon knowing this, we truly understand that 
a negative action will give rise to a negative effect and that a pos­
itive action will have a positive effect. At this point, we are free 
from ignorance about the workings of cause and effect and have 
wisdom that is free from ignorance concerning the conventional 
level of reality. 
Realizing the ultimate truth does not prevent us from seeing 
the conventional truth. Rather, by understanding how appear­
ances arise unceasingly on the conventional level, we realize the 
empty nature of appearances and we understand the ultimate truth 
which is their birthless nature. Realizing this truth, we are not 
distracted by appearances and so we see the union of means and 
wisdom. This union is the Prajnaparamita, the perfection of wis­
dom, which is often described as being a mother. Whether one is 
133 
Shentong and Rangtong: Two Views of E111ptiness 
a prince, a minister or a beggar, one is born from a mother. In the 
same way, the shravakas, pratyekabuddhas, bodhisattvas, and 
Buddhas are born from this wisdom. We can call this realization 
of the perfection of wisdom the "Prajnaparamita" or we can call 
it "Mahamudra." Whatever we call it, it is the ultimate realization 
of all the sutra and tantra teachings. 
This concludes the commentary on the third subdivision in 
the seventh chapter of The Compendium of Knowledge by Jam­
gon Kongtrul Lodro Thaye, the Great. 
134 
12 
Applying These 
Teachings to Our Practice 
The principal view of the teachings on emptiness has been 
from the view of the sutras. The view of the sutras can be 
found with.in the teachings ofthe Buddha himself(the su­
tras) and the treatises composed by great Buddhist masters (the 
shastras). We can learn the philosophical view from both of these 
types of texts. The tradition of the teachings given in Jamgon 
Kongtrul's text is that of the shastras, the treatises of the great 
masters. 
Some people disagree and say, "It is wrong to emphasize the 
treatises. Instead, one should concentrate on the sutras of the 
Buddha himself." But, in fact, this is not so. We should concen­
trate on the treatises because for ordinary beings the sutras are 
difficult to master. The sutras go into minute details in some 
places and are very condensed in other places. The great masters 
have been able to explain the concise teachings or condense the 
long teachings of the Buddha. Also, some teachings of the Bud­
dha are scattered among different sutras and aren't in any se­
quential order. However, the masters were able to organize the 
teachings so that the meaning contained in the sutras is accessi­
ble to ordinary people and can be easily learned. For example, 
one of the five works of Maitreya is the Ornament of Clear Re-
135 
Shentong and Rangtong: TJvo Vie1vs of Efllptiness 
alization. This commentary is a very short text of about 20 pages 
and covers the entire meaning of the I 00,000 verses (a twelve 
volume canon) of the great Prajnaparamita sutra. 
We can study the treatises such as the main text of Nagar­
juna, The Mula-madhyamaka-prajna, but does that mean that af­
terwards we can meditate on the teachings of these texts? No, 
because it isn't easy to apply these teachings to meditation. When 
it comes to meditation, the spiritual songs are more important 
than the shastras. The spiritual songs (Skt. doha) are the songs of 
great Indian masters, such as Saraha. We can study the The Kings 
Doha, The Queens Doha, and The Citizens Doha of Saraha or 
The Doha of Naropa and The Doha of Tilopa, all of which are 
spiritual songs from India that present the view of how to medi­
tate in brief. These spiritual songs don't present extensive de­
scriptions or logical arguments to explain the view. Rather, they 
are brief and direct instructions based on the master's experience 
of meditation and realization. There are also the spiritual songs 
ofMarpa, Milarepa, and Gampopa which come to us from Tibet. 
These spiritual songs also describe in a direct, concise, and clear 
form the view and how we should meditate. 
There are also the oral instructions that one receives through 
the orally transmitted lineage. One's teacher says, "These are the 
instructions which I have received from my teacher. This is how 
I practiced them and this is how you should practice them. If you 
practice them in this way, you will benefit from practicing them." 
In fact, the oral instructions one receives from one's teacher are 
the most beneficial teachings one can receive for practicing med­
itation. They are more important than the teachings of sutras, the 
shastras, or the spiritual songs. 
The logical arguments taught in the sutra tradition are im­
portant for the realization of emptiness. We think, "Phenomena 
are empty for this and that reason. External phenomena are empty 
and internal consciousnesses are empty." By applying these log­
ical arguments and also from the wisdom that comes from con­
templation, we attain a certainty concerning the emptiness of 
136 
App!yil{!!, These Teachings to Our Practice 
phenomena. We develop a certainty to the extent that if a great 
scholar comes along and tells us, "That is not how it is. The na­
ture of phenomena is not emptiness," we will think, "He is wrong 
because however much he knows, the nature of phenomena is 
emptiness. He is definitely wrong." We develop a strong certainty 
developed through the reasoning that is taught in the sutra tradi­
tion. 
This certainty about the egolessness of self and phenomena 
is very important, but is it enough? No, because it takes a long 
time to attain the goal of realization by following the path ofthe 
sutras. It is said that it takes eons to gain the result based upon 
certainty because it is a very gentle and slow approach. It is 
through reasoning that we gain certainty of generosity, good con­
duct, patience, and the other paramitas and then accumulate 
merit. This careful and slow approach will take many lifetimes 
before we attain our goal of Buddhahood. 
Is this the only way to practice? No, there is also the way of 
the Vajrayana, which has the instructions through which we can 
attain our goal within one lifetime with the same body. Milarepa 
provides an example. One night Rechungpa was dreaming that he 
was in a realm where the stories of the lives of great masters were 
being told. They were wonderful accounts. Some dakinis said, 
"These are wonderful, but it would be much more wonderful to 
only hear about the life ofMilarepa. It is much more important." 
They asked, "Who is going to tell the life story of Milarepa?" 
Rechungpa noticed that some dakinis were pointing at him. 
When he woke up, he went to see Milarepa and told him, "I asked 
for and received all these meditation instructions from you, but I 
have never asked you to tell the story of your life. Based on what 
you have accomplished, you can't be an ordinary person. You 
must be an emanation of someone like Vajrapani or one of the 
Buddhas ofthe five families." He then asked Milarepa, "Please 
tell the story of your life, how you developed your diligence, how 
you developed realization, and how you attained the result." 
137 
Shentong and Rangtong: T11lo Vim's of Emptiness 
Milarepa told Rechungpa, "You think that I am an emanation 
of someone. This is an expression of your faith and pure vision 
of me, but in terms of the dharma it is the wrong view because I 
am not an emanation of the Buddha. I am not an emanation of a 
bodhisattva. I am an emanation of nothing. I am merely an ordi­
nary person. Not only am I an ordinary being, I had such bad 
karma because I practiced sorcery and I brought hailstorms down 
on people and killed them. Your belief that I am not an ordinary 
person is incorrect because this view actually denies the power of 
the dharma. I was an ordinary person with extremely bad karma, 
but due to the power of the dharma I met my master Marpa who 
gave me instructions, and I practiced these with diligence. 
Through this effort I was able to purify my bad karma and attain 
the result." Thus, you should not think that the dharma doesn't 
have that power. On the contrary, even someone with very bad 
karma can purify it and attain Buddhahood in this lifetime if he 
or she practices diligently. 
What is special about the Vajrayana tradition is that it enables 
one to achieve Buddhahood within a single lifetime and this path 
is a direct path with a direct view of the nature of phenomena. It 
is a tradition not established through inference and reasoning. 
Through reasoning, we can conclude that appearances are by na­
ture empty. On the Vajrayana path, we put that reasoning aside as 
being neither beneficial nor harmful. We put that aside because 
it doesn't really matter whether appearances are only mind or 
not. We just let appearances be appearances in our meditation. 
Tilopa in his spiritual song to Naropa said in his famous phrase, 
"My son, appearances cannot harm you. It is attachment to ap­
pearances which you must destroy." Thus, we don't worry about 
appearances because they cannot cause us any harm. All the harm 
that arises is in our own mind; all harm comes from attachment 
in our own mind. All happiness and sorrow occurs in the mind; 
disturbing emotions, wrong views, anger, jealousy, pride, all arise 
within our own mind. It is our mind that we need to worry about, 
not the appearances. All our problems and difficulties arise in the 
138 
Appfying These Teachings to Our Practice 
mind, so we need to deal with that. The mind is the root or source 
of the path. 
The sutra tradition divides the mind into different conscious­
nesses that have exclusive properties. Thus, there is the visual 
consciousness, the hearing consciousness, the mental conscious­
ness, and so on. Even though these are taught as being separate 
consciousnesses, they are, in fact, all mind. The visual con­
sciousness is just mind, the aural consciousness is just mind, the 
mental consciousness is just mind, the eighth ground conscious­
ness is just mind, and so forth. One should see it in that way, 
"Mind is just simply mind." In the sutra path we are focusing on 
the mind and we "do this through reasoning. We can apply all sorts 
of reasoning to determine the nature of the mind. But whether 
we apply reasoning or not, the mind is the mind; the mind just 
continues in the same way. 
In the Vajrayana there is the direct path to examining mind. 
In everyday life we are habituated to thinking, "I have a mind 
and I perceive these things." Ordinarily, we do not directly look 
at the mind and therefore do not see the mind. This is very strange 
because we see things and we know that we are seeing visual 
phenomena. But who is seeing? We can look directly at the mind 
and find that there is no one seeing; there is no seer, and yet we 
are seeing phenomena. The same is true for the mental con­
sciousness. We think various thoughts, but where is that thinking 
taking place? Who or what is thinking? However, when we look 
directly at the mind, we discover that there is nobody there; there 
is no thinker and yet thinking is going on. This approach of di­
rectly looking in a state of meditation isn't one of reasoning, but 
of directly looking at the mind to see what is there. 
For example, Changkya Rolpai Dorje expressed his experi­
ence in a spiritual song. He wrote about a child sitting on his 
mother's lap and looking all around, thinking, "I have lost my 
mother." His older brother then tells him, "Tum around. You are 
sitting on her lap." The child does so and sees his mother. 
Changkya Rolpai Dorje in this example means to show that, like 
139 
S bentong and Rangtong: Two Views of Emptiness 
that child, residing in the true nature of phenomena, but looking 
for it elsewhere is an incorrect perception or bewilderment. He 
thinks, "I can't understand the dharmadhatu. Where is it?'' The 
older brother, who represents the interdependence of relative phe­
nomena, says, "Look, dharmadhatu is right there." So he turns 
around and sees, "Oh, yes." He had been looking for it externally 
but it was there all the time. It is the same for the emptiness of the 
mind. One looks at it and discovers, "There is no mind. It is sim­
ply emptiness. There it is, that emptiness of the mind. I have been 
looking for it at a great distance, going through a process of log­
ical reasoning to understand it. All along it was right here. By 
looking inwards I see that there is no mind. There is simply 
emptiness." 
Some people may wonder, "What is the mind? What is being 
looked at in the mind? Who is looking?" They think about this, 
but if we simply look, we can directly experience this. We can 
search for the mind in the head, in the arms, in the legs, and 
throughout the body. If we look, we will find lots of different 
thoughts arising, of anger and so on. Where do they come from? 
They don't come from anywhere. We will see that this is empti­
ness. We cannot find what generates thoughts when looking for 
the mind. We can conclude, "This is the emptiness that the Bud­
dha spoke about." We can see it directly for ourselves. That is 
why it is the direct path. We look inwards and find that thoughts 
arise from nowhere. 
This doesn't mean that one is mindless and like a stone, with­
out awareness and knowing because we have knowledge all the 
time; we perceive and know. At the same time, there is no mind 
to be found. We have the aspect of emptiness and the aspect of lu­
minous clarity. 
We do not have to use logic or reasoning to see directly the 
mind. The mind itself is the dharmadhatu. Whether we examine 
it or not, that is what it is. We can look and see the dharmadhatu. 
We can see emptiness. We can see luminous clarity because that 
is the mind itself. It is just that we haven't looked. Jamgon 
140 
AppfyillJ!, These Teachings to Our Practice 
Kongtrul says that the reason why the nature of the mind has not 
been realized is because it is too easy to see. It is not that the na­
ture of mind is very far away; instead, it is very close. In fact, it 
is too close, too easy. Realization of the nature of the mind isn't 
an ordeal or difficult to accomplish. All one has to do is look at 
the nature of the mind, but because it is too close and too easy, we 
think, "That can't be it." 
Some people say that what these lamas say is silly because, 
"How can the mind look at the mind? It is not possible." But sim­
ply, if we look at the mind, then we will gain the experience of 
the mind and we will see that there is clarity and emptiness. We 
will have a direct experience of dharmadhatu if we actually prac­
tice the meditation and look directly at our own mind. This is 
very important to do. 
Someone may ask, "Why bother? The mind can't look at the 
mind so it makes no difference if you look or not. There is noth­
ing to see when the mind looks at the mind." But, in fact, it is 
very important to be able to do just that. By looking at the nature 
of the mind, we can see the nature of luminous clarity and the 
nature of emptiness; we can see what and how the nature of the 
mind is. We shouldn't think that there is nothing to gain by try­
ing to look at the mind and therefore just ignore it. We shouldn't 
do that because it is very beneficial to discover the truth. 
141 
5 bentong and Rangtong: Two Vie1vs rf Emptiness 
A Brief Biography of Thrangu Rinpoche 
Thrangu Rinpoche was born in Kham in 1933. At the age of 
five he was formally recognized by the Sixteenth Karmapa and the 
previous Situ Rinpoche as the incarnation of the great Thrangu 
tulku. Entering Thrangu monastery, from the ages of seven to six­
teen he studied reading, writing, grammar, poetry, and astrology, 
memorized ritual texts, and completed two preliminary retreats. At 
sixteen under the direction of Khenpo Lodro Rabsel he began the 
study of the three vehicles of Buddhism while staying in retreat. At 
twenty-three he received full ordination from the Sixteenth 
Karmapa. 
At the time of the Chinese military takeover ofTibet when he 
was twenty-seven Rinpoche left Tibet for India. He was called to 
Rumtek, Sikkim, where the Karmapa had his seat in exile. At thirty­
five he took the geshe examination before 1500 monks and was 
awarded the degree of Geshe Lharampa. On his return to Rumtek 
he was named Abbot ofRumtek monastery and the Nalanda Insti­
tute for Higher Buddhist studies at Rumtek. He has been the per­
sonal teacher of the four principal Karma Kagyu tulkus: Shamar 
Rinpoche, Situ Rinpoche, Jamgon Kongtrul Rinpoche, and 
Gyaltsab Rinpoche and more recently the 17th Karmapa. 
Thrangu Rinpoche has traveled extensively throughout Europe, 
North America, and the Far East. In 1994 he spent several months 
in Tibet at his monastery where he ordained over 100 monks and 
nuns and visited several monasteries. In Nepal Rinpoche founded 
Thrangu Tashi Choling in Bodhanath, a retreat center and college 
at Nama Buddha, a private school in Bodhanath for lay children 
and young monks. He also has built Tara Abbey offering a full 
dhanna education for nuns and completed a beautiful monastery in 
Sarnath, India. In North America, Rinpoche has centers in Van­
couver, Toronto, Maine, Colorado, and California. 
For more information on Thrangu Rinpoche's activities and 
centers, please go to his website: www.rinpoche.com. 
142 
Notes 
I. The conventional or relative level (Tib. kunzop) is phenomena as 
they appear to us ordinary beings in day-to-day life. On this level 
we feel we are distinct separate persons and that the objects outside 
of us are solid and real. The ultimate or absolute level (Tib. don­
dam) is phenomena as they really are which is empty of inherent 
nature and as they are perceived by an enlightened being or Bud­
dha. 
To give a Western example, we may be sitting on a chair and 
this chair on the conventional level of reality appears to be solid, 
made of a single substance of wood, and brown in color. However, 
a scientist would tell us that "in reality" the chair is a pattern of 
atoms of Carbon, Hydrogen, and Oxygen that are moving at in­
credible speeds and are emitting a frequency of radiation that the 
human eye sees as "brown." These atoms are so far apart from each 
other that the chair is actually 99.9% space. This is more what the 
chair is on the ultimate level. 
Thrangu Rinpoche points out that a highly developed person 
who has thoroughly realized the emptiness of matter, such as Mi­
larepa, can put his hand right through the chair to prove that it isn't 
solid, but "empty." 
2. This concept of"nature" is similar to Aristotle's concept in Western 
philosophy. For example, water has the external appearance of hot 
and gaseous (when it is steam), liquid and flowing (when it is 
water) and hard and cold (when it is ice). These are its external ap­
pearances (much like conventional truth already described), but its 
nature or essence is that of water (much like ultimate truth already 
described). 
3. The Middle-way (Skt. Madhyamaka) school or tradition of study 
was founded by Nagarjuna about 500 years after the Buddha 
passed away in the first century of our era. Nagarjuna, besides 
being a brilliant scholar at Nalanda University in India, was a re-
143 
Shentong and Rangtong: T1Vo VieJVs of Entptiness 
alized tantric practitioner (a mahasiddha) who through the power 
of his meditation was able to visit the realms of the nagas and 
bring back the Prajnaparamita teachings which are the main 
teachings of the Buddha on emptiness (Skt. shunyata). Nagar­
juna wrote many works explaining emptiness and these works 
are extensively studied in Tibetan monasteries to this day. 
4. Disturbing emotions (Skt. klesha, Tib. nyon mong) have been 
translated as "afflictions," "defilements," or "kleshas." These are 
emotions which could obscure or disturb the mind so that the true 
nature of mind cannot be seen. There are, of course, also positive 
emotions and feelings such as devotion which help one see the 
true nature. The main characteristic of the disturbing emotions 
is that they all come out of or support the belief in a self and 
therefore lead to suffering because these disturbing emotions are 
supporting an incorrect belief. The three main disturbing emo­
tions are attachment to things, aggression or a wanting to elimi­
nate anything we don't like, and confusion about how things 
really are which is often translated as ignorance or bewilderment. 
The five disturbing emotions are these three plus pride and jeal­
ousy. There are a host of other disturbing emotions which support 
a belief in a self and thus lead to suffering. 
5. Egolessness of the individual is often called "the selflessness of 
self' or "selflessness of person" and is the realization the per­
sonal self does not exist as a solid entity, but rather that it is a 
construct created by the mind. 
6. Egolessness of phenomena is often called the "selflessness of phe­
nomena" and this is the realization that not only is the belief in 
the self empty of inherent nature, but also that all external phe­
nomena such as trees and rocks and other people are also empty 
of inherent nature. 
7. The Tibetan word for emptiness (Skt. shunyata, Tib. tong pa nyi) 
literally means "empty" as in an empty glass. However, the Bud­
dhist philosophical term means much more. When it is said that 
an object is "empty," it does not mean that the object simply isn't 
there because the object can obviously be seen, smelled, and 
grasped. On the other hand, because this empty object appears to 
144 
Notes 
us, this does not mean that it is a real, solid, external object that ex­
ists outside of the conception of mind. This concept is vital to un­
derstanding the text and is explained in greater detail several times 
in this text. 
8. Luminous clarity (Tib. salwa) often called "luminosity" or just "clar­
ity" is the quality of mind that knows or cognizes. This continuous 
knowing of mind which goes on even when we are asleep is pres­
ent all the time even though the mind itself is empty. 
9. Buddha-nature or Buddha-essence (Skt. sugatagarbha, Tib. der 
shing nying po) is that quality of emptiness that exists in all sentient 
beings that allows them to eventually achieve Buddhahood. The 
reason we don't just suddenly reach Buddhahood is that this Bud­
dha-nature is obscured by the disturbing emotions. 
I 0. We have translated the Tibetan word marigpa which is one of the 
three fundamental kleshas translated as "ignorance" and sometimes 
as "confusion." In the Tibetan this word refers to not understand­
ing the true nature of reality (Skt. dharmata), not ignorance in the 
sense of being ignorant of how to read and write or how to use the 
internet. 
II. In Mahamudra meditation there is a clear distinction between in­
tellectual thinking about something (as is done in the sutra ap­
proach) and resting in an extremely clear and calm state of 
Shamatha and "looking directly" at mind which involves no con­
ceptualization or discursive thought at all. 
12. The view of eternalism (Tib. tak ta) is that there is a permanent 
eternal self or soul. The view of nihilism (Tib. che ta) is that every­
thing stops at death; therefore there is no law of cause and effect 
(karma) and there is basically no reason to do good deeds and avoid 
negative ones or to try to reach enlightenment. 
13. Latencies (Tib. bag chag) are karmic tendencies connected to every 
action and thought which enters the eighth storehouse conscious­
ness. Then as circumstances occur, they will leave the storehouse 
consciousness and enter the mental consciousness thus flavoring 
the mental perception of the moment. For a much more detailed 
description of this process see Thrangu Rinpoche 's Transcending 
Ego: Distinguishing Consciousness from Wisdom. 
145 
5 hen tong and Rangtong: Two Views of Emptiness 
14. Since the Buddha taught that there were no external gods or 
god that created and directed the world, everything that 
happens in the universe is due to interdependent origina­
tion. In other words, an action is done and that becomes the 
cause of other actions which then become the cause for 
more actions and so on until the world unfolds. 
15. The following section is not part of Jamgon Kongtrul's original 
text, but Thrangu Rinpoche felt it was necessary for students to 
understand that in terms of actual meditation practice conduct is 
as important as having the correct view 
16. The three natures were first described in the Mahayana Samdhi­
nirmocana sutra. This sutra is based on the Chittamatra (Mind­
only) school. The order of how these three natures are presented 
causes some confusion. Beginning with the second nature, the 
dependent nature, the reason we can so readily recognize exter­
nal phenomena such as a chair, rocks, and trees and so on is that 
we have stored in our eighth consciousness these latencies (Tib. 
bak chag) from this and previous lifetimes and so we recognize 
these objects. The recognition of the object along with all our 
past associations with that object definitely appears in our mind, 
but it is entirely "dependent" on a mental formation of our mind. 
This is why two people can look at the same landscape or movie, 
or political personality and one person will think it is wonderful 
and the other awful. 
Because we perceive our world based on the second de­
pendent nature, our mind engages in the first imaginary nature 
of believing that this dependently created thought in our mind is 
solid and real. We therefore believe that the external phenom­
ena are solid and real when they are actually empty. It is this 
imaginary nature that takes all the sensory information from the 
five sensory consciousnesses and labels and categorizes and 
judges these phenomena and in this process solidifies external 
phenomena as being real and solid. 
The third completely perfect nature is held in the Chittama­
tra school and third turning of the wheel of dhanna teachings. In 
the Shentong school this perfect nature is that true nature of ex-
146 
Notes 
istence which is on the absolute level and this position is not held 
by the Rangtong view. 
17. Sentient beings are beginningless because they arise from the cause 
of a previous life. Since the previous life also has a cause which 
precedes it, there is an infinite number of previous lives and no 
definite beginning. Sentient beings are endless because there is an 
infinite number of sentient beings who constantly accumulate the 
causes of future happiness and misery. 
-David Choephel 
18. There_ are three realms or kayas (Skt. for form body). The first is the 
Dharmakaya which is ultimate truth which can be accessed only by 
a Buddha who realizes the dharmata. However, if this were the 
only way to access the dharma, only a few individuals in the world 
would ever have access to the Buddhist teachings. So the Buddha 
manifested the sambhogakaya which are the pure realms which 
may be visited by the very pure bodhisattvas. For example, Asanga 
after meditating on Maitreya for 12 years was able to meet the 
Maitreya Buddha and to go to his pure sambhogakaya realm and 
receive teachings from him. But again then the only people who 
could access the Buddhist teachings would be very high bod­
hisattvas. So the Buddha also manifests the nirmanakaya which is 
in our ordinary world and the best example of this was the Supreme 
Nirmanakaya who was the historical Buddha who was born a 
human and lived a life teaching the Buddhist teachings to ordinary 
beings. 
19. This is not part of the original text, but Rinpoche felt that it was im­
portant to add this topic to the commentary. 
20. The Mind-only school does not fully realize subtle egolessness of 
phenomena because they still cling to consciousness as having true 
existence. 
21. Nagas are water spirits said to dwell in lakes and oceans. They are 
keepers of wealth which includes the precious dharma teachings. 
It is said that Nagarjuna noticed that two individuals who were at­
tending his lectures smelled of sandalwood. When he approached 
them, he found out they were nagas and they took him to their 
realm (which may not have been a physical place, like pure realms 
but are not located anywhere geographically). There he was given 
147 
Shentong and Rangtong: TJvo Views of Emptiness 
an immense text of the Prajnaparamita. 
22. The five logical arguments of Nagarjuna are: ( 1) Analysis of nei­
ther one or many, (2) Analysis of the vajra splinters, (3) Analysis 
of negating arising through existence and non-existence, ( 4) Analy­
sis of the four limits, (5) Analysis of interdependent arising. 
23. Mindfulness and memory are the same word in Tibetan and San­
skrit. Mindfulness is therefore always remembering what you 
should be doing. -David Choephel 
24. This section on Meditation is not part of the root text. Thrangu Rin­
poche felt, however, that it was important to the topic. 
25. Traditionally, these are the seven points of Vairochana. These are 
( 1) Straighten the upper body and the spinal column, (2) Look 
slightly downward into space straight across from the tip of the 
nose while keeping the chin and neck straight, (3) Straighten the 
shoulder blades even in the manner of a vulture flexing its wings, 
(4) Keep the lips touching gently, (5) Let the tip of the tongue 
touch the upper palate, (6) Form the legs into either the lotus (Skt. 
padmasana) or the diamond (Skt. vajrasana) posture, and (7)Keep 
the back of the right hand flat on the left open palm with the inside 
of the tips of the thumbs gently touching. 
26. The five texts of Maitreya are The Ornament of Mahayana Dis­
courses, The Ornament of Clear Realization, Distinguishing the 
Middle from the Extremes, Distinguishing Dharma from Dhar­
mata, and The Uttaratantra Shastra. 
148 
The Glossary 
Abhidharma The Buddhist teachings are often divided into the Trip­
itaka: the Sutras (teachings of the Buddha), the Vinaya (teachings 
on conduct), and the Abhidharma which are the teachings classi­
fying phenomena into types and categories. 
aggregates, five (Skt. skandha) There are five mental transformations 
·that perceptions undergo: First, there is form which includes im­
ages, sounds, tastes, etc. that are perceived by the senses. Second 
is feeling, in which one treats the form as positive, negative, or 
neutral. Third is conception, which is recognizing the sensation. 
Fourth is formation or concept, in which one combines the per­
ception with past experience. Finally there is consciousness, which 
is ordinary consciousness with all its discursive thoughts. 
aryas One who has attained a direct realization of the true nature of re­
ality thus realizing the emptiness of self and phenomena. 
Aryadeva The closest pupil of Nagarjuna who became his heir. He 
was born in Sri Lanka and wrote the Catuhshakate. 
Asanga A fourth century Indian philosopher who founded the Mind­
only school and discovered the five works of Maitreya which are 
important Mahayana works. His brother was Vasubandhu. 
atman Sanskrit for a permanent "self' which continues to exist even 
after death. This is held by most Hindu schools and is rejected by 
all Buddhist schools. 
Bhavaviveka ( 490 to 570 CE) An Indian Middle-way scholar who crit­
icized Buddhapalita 's interpretation of emptiness, leading to a split 
in Mahayana Buddhism. Bhavaviveka founded the Svantantrika 
school which used svatantra (syllogisms) to establish emptiness 
instead of using the negation system of the Prasangikas. His works 
include the Prajna-pradipa and Madhyamaka-hridaya and the 
Tarka-jvala. 
bodhichitta Literally, the "mind or heart of enlightenment." There are 
two kinds ofbodhichitta: absolute bodhichitta, which is the com­
pletely awakened mind that sees the emptiness of phenomena, and 
relative bodhichitta, which is the aspiration to practice the six 
149 
Shentong and Rangtong: Two Views of Emptiness 
paramitas and free all beings from the suffering of samsara. 
bodhisattva Literally, "one who exhibits the mind of enlightenment." 
An individual who is committed to the Mahayana path of practic­
ing compassion and the six paramitas in order to achieve Buddha­
hood and free all beings from samsara. More specifically, those 
with a motivation to achieve liberation from samsara who are on 
one of the ten bodhisattva levels that culminates in Buddhahood. 
bodhisattva levels (Skt. bhumi, literally, "ground") The levels or stages 
a bodhisattva goes through to reach enlightenment. These consist 
often levels in the sutra tradition and thirteen in the tantra tradition. 
Bon (Tib. Pronounced "pon") This is the religion ofTibet before Bud­
dhism was introduced. The religion is still practiced in Tibet. A fol­
lower of this pre-Buddhist religion is a Bonpo. 
Buddha-nature (Skt. tathagata-garbha literally "the nature of one 
thus gone") The original nature present in all beings which when 
realized leads to enlightenment. It is also called the Buddha­
essence. 
Changkya Rolpai Dorje The fourth Karmpapa and teacher of the Em­
peror of China in 1786. 
chakra Literally, "wheel." In this context centers of energy along the 
central channel at the forehead, throat, heart, solar plexus, and the 
"secret place" located four finger widths below the navel where 
there is a broadening of channels. 
Chakrasamvara One of the five main practices ofthe Kagyu lineage. 
This yidam is a heruka of the lotus (or Amitabha Buddha) family 
and plays an important part in the Six Yogas ofNaropa. The other 
four are Mahamaya, Vajabhairava, Guhyasamaja, and Hevajra. 
Chandrakirti A seventh century Indian Buddhist scholar of the Mid­
dle-way school who is best known for his support of the Prasangika 
school which established emptiness by using logical method of re­
ductio ad absurdum. He wrote two main treatises-the Prasanna­
pada and Introduction to the Middle-way. 
conventional truth or level of reality (Tib. kunsop) There are two 
truths or levels of reality: relative or conventional and ultimate or 
absolute truth. Relative truth is the perception of an ordinary (un­
enlightened) person who sees the world with all his or her projec­
tions based on the false belief in ego. 
Chittamatra See Mind-only school. 
150 
The Glossary 
clarity See luminous clarity. 
creation stage Also known as the development stage. In the Vajrayana 
there are two stages of meditation: the creation stage and the com­
pletion stage. The creation stage involves visualizing and contem­
plating deities for the purpose of realizing the purity of all 
phenomena. In this stage visualization of the deity is established 
and maintained. 
definitive teaching Teachings of the Buddha which give the direct 
meaning of dharma and are not changed or simplified for the ca­
pacity of the listener. This contrasts with the provisional meaning. 
dharma This has two meanings. It can mean any phenomena or it can 
mean the teachings of the Buddha which is also referred to as Bud­
dha-dharma. 
dharmadhatu The all-encompassing space, unoriginated and without 
beginning, out of which all phenomena arise. The Sanskrit means 
"the essence of phenomena" and the Tibetan means "the expanse 
of phenomena." 
dharmakaya or "truth-body." One of the three bodies of Buddha. It is 
enlightenment itself, that is, wisdom beyond reference point. See 
kayas, three. 
disturbing emotion (Skt. klesha) The emotional obscurations (in con­
trast to intellectual obscurations) which are also translated as "af­
flictions" or "poisons." The three main disturbing emotions are 
passion or attachment, aggression or anger; and ignorance or delu­
sion. The five kleshas are the three above plus pride and envy. 
egolessness (Tib. dag me) Also called selflessness. The understanding 
that there is no permanent or separate identity or substance to be 
found. There are two kinds of egolessness-the egolessness of 
other or the emptiness of external phenomena, and the emptiness 
of a personal self. 
egolessness or selflessness of person This doctrine asserts that when 
one looks for the person, one doesn't find anything. The person 
does not possess a self (Skt. atman, Tib. dag nyid) as an inde­
pendent or substantial entity. This position is held by most Bud­
dhist schools. 
egolessness or selflessness of phenomena This doctrine asserts than 
not only is there selflessness of a person, but when one examines 
outer phenomena, one finds that external phenomena are also 
151 
Shentong and Rangtong: Tivo Views of Emptiness 
empty; that is, they do not have an independent or substantial na­
ture. This position is not held by the Foundation vehicle schools, 
but is put forth by the Mahayana schools, particularly the Mind­
only school. 
eight consciousnesses These are the five sensory consciousnesses of 
sight, hearing, smell, taste, touch, and body sensation. The sixth 
consciousness is mental consciousness which does our ordinary 
thinking. The seventh consciousness is afflicted (klesha) con­
sciousness which is the ever-present feeling of "I." Finally, the 
eighth consciousness is the ground (or alaya) consciousness. 
eternalism (Tib. tak) A belief that one's self has concrete existence and 
is eternal. This contrasts with nihilism. 
five Buddha families The five sambhogakaya Buddhas embody each 
of the five enlightened wisdoms. They are Vairocana of the Bud­
dha family representing dharmadhatu wisdom, Akshobhya of the 
vajra family representing mirror-like wisdom, Ratnasambhava of 
the jewel family representing wisdom of equality, Amitabha Bud­
dha of the lotus family representing discriminating wisdom, and 
Amoghasiddhi of the karma family representing all-accomplish­
ing wisdom. 
Foundation vehicle (Skt. hinayana) The first teachings of the Bud­
dha which emphasized the careful examination of mind and its 
confusion. 
Great Exposition school (Skt. Prasangika) One offour main Founda­
tion vehicle schools, with the other three being the Sutra-followers, 
Mind-only, and Middle-way schools. This school held that matter 
was real or independently existing and was composed of particles 
and that time was real and composed of moments which then made 
up consciousness. 
Jamgon Kongtrul ( 1813-1899 CE) Also known as Lodro Thaye. He 
was best known for founding the non-sectarian rimay movement, 
an eclectic movement which preserved the various practice line­
ages that were on the verge of extinction. He also was a prolific 
writer and wrote ninety volumes. 
Kadampa (Tib.) One of the early schools in Tibet. It was founded by 
Atisha (993-1 054 CE). Its teachings were absorbed into other 
schools. 
Kagyu (Tib.) One of the four major schools of Buddhism in Tibet. It 
152 
The Glossary 
was founded by Marpa. The other three are the Nyingma, the 
Sakya, and the Gelukpa schools 
Kangyur (Tib.) The Tibetan collection of about I 04 volumes of the 
words of the Buddha. The other great collection is the Tengyur, a 
collection of commentaries on the Buddha's teachings. 
kay as, three There are three bodies of the Buddha: the nirmanakaya, 
sambhogakaya and dharmakaya. The dharmakaya, also called the 
"truth body," is the complete enlightenment or the complete wis­
dom of the Buddha which is unoriginated wisdom beyond form 
and which manifests in the sambhogakaya and the nirmanakaya. 
The sambhogakaya, or the "enjoyment body," manifests only to 
bodhisattvas. The nirmanakaya, or the "emanation body," mani­
fests in the world to ordinary beings and in this context is under­
stood as the historical Shakyamuni Buddha. 
luminous clarity (Tib. salwa) Also translated as luminosity. The nature 
of mind is empty of inherent existence, but not merely empty, be­
cause it has clarity which is awareness or the knowing quality of 
mind. 
Mahamudra Literally, "great seal" meaning that all phenomena are 
sealed by the primordially perfect true nature. This form of medi­
tation is traced back to Saraha (I Oth century) and was passed down 
in the Kagyu school through Marpa. This meditative transmission 
emphasizes perceiving mind directly rather than through analysis. 
Mahayana Literally, the "great vehicle." These are the teachings of 
the second turning of the wheel of dharma, which emphasize 
emptiness, compassion, and Buddha-nature. 
Maitreya In this work, the bodhisattva Maitreya who lived at the time 
of the Buddha. Maitreya is presently residing in the Tush ita pure 
realm until he becomes the next Buddha of this eon. 
Marpa (I 012-1 097 CE) A Tibetan who made three trips to India and 
brought back many tantric texts, including the Six Yogas of 
Naropa, the Guhyasamaja, and the Chakrasamvara practices. His 
main teacher was Naropa and he founded the Kagyu lineage in 
Tibet. 
Middle-way (Skt. madhyamaka) The most influential of the four 
schools of Indian Buddhism founded by Nagarjuna in the second 
century CE based on the Prajnaparamita teachings. "Middle-way" 
means it is the middle way between eternalism and nihilism. The 
153 
Shentong and Rangtong: Two Views of Emptiness 
main postulate of this school is that all phenomena-both internal 
mental events and external physical objects-are empty of any true 
nature. The school uses extensive reasoning to establish the empti­
ness of self and phenomena. 
Mikyo Dorje (1507-1554 CE) the eighth Karmapa. 
Milarepa (1040-1123 CE) Milarepa was a student ofMarpa who at­
tained enlightenment in one lifetime. His student Gampopa 
founded the Kagyu lineage. 
Mind-only school (Skt. chittamatra) One of the major schools in the 
Mahayana tradition founded in the fourth century by Asanga which 
emphasizes that all phenomena are mental events. 
Nagarjuna An Indian scholar in the second century who founded the 
Middle-way philosophical school. 
Nalanda The greatest Buddhist University from the fifth to the tenth 
century, located near modem Rajgir which was the seat of the Ma­
hayana teachings; many great Buddhist scholars studied there. 
N aropa (956-1 040 CE). An Indian master who is best known for trans­
mitting many Vajrayana teachings to Marpa. 
nihilism An extreme view of emptiness (holding that everything is 
meaningless) and death ends everything. Therefore there is no rea­
son to engage in positive actions in this lifetime or strive for awak­
ening. 
nirmanakaya (Tib. tulku) There are three bodies of the Buddha; the 
nirmanakaya or "emanation body" manifests in the physical world 
and in this context manifests as the Shakyamuni Buddha. See 
kayas, three. 
nirvana Literally, "extinguished." With spiritual practice individuals 
can attain a state of enlightenment in which all false ideas and con­
flicting emotions have been extinguished. This is called nirvana. 
oral instructions (Tib. man ngak) Sometimes called the quintessential 
or pith instructions. These instructions are given from guru to stu­
dent concerning meditation on the nature of mind. While some of 
these are also written down, many are only passed on orally. 
Padmasambhava (Tib. Guru Rinpoche) A great Indian Mahasiddha 
who was invited to Tibet by King Trisong Detsen in the eighth cen­
tury CE. He is known for introducing Buddhism to Tibet and paci­
fying the non-Buddhist forces there. He also founded the Nyingma 
lineage. 
154 
The Glossary 
Patrol Rinpoche ( 1808-1887 CE) A famous Nyingma teacher who 
wrote The Words of My Perfect Teacher. 
pramana The study of validity, that is, ofhow we know that what we 
think is correct. 
Prasangika One of the major schools of Middle-way Buddhism whose 
main representatives were Buddhapalita and Chandrakirti. See 
Great Exposition school. 
pratyekabuddha Literally, self-buddha. A Foundation vehicle practi­
tioner awakens without relying on a teaching in his last existence. 
provisional teaching The teachings of the Buddha which have been 
simplified or modified to the capabilities of the audience. This con­
"trasts with the definitive teachings. 
Rangtong School (Tib.) The Madhyamaka or Middle-way school is 
divided into two major schools: the Rangtong and Shentong. The 
distinction is that Rangtong primarily emphasizes emptiness, and 
Shentong primarily emphasizes clear wisdom. 
Rechungpa A major student of Milarepa. 
sambhogakaya The second of the three bodies of the Buddha, the "en­
joyment body," is a realm which only manifests to bodhisattvas. 
See the kayas, three. 
samsara Conditioned existence of ordinary life in which suffering oc­
curs because one still possesses the disturbing emotions. It is con­
trasted to nirvana. 
sangha The companions on the path. They may be all the persons on 
the path or "the Noble Sangha," which refers to the realized ones. 
Saraha One of the eighty-four mahasiddhas of India said to have lived 
in the ninth century CE who was known for composing the first 
spiritual songs about Mahamudra. 
Sarvastivada A Foundation level school that separated from the Ther­
avadin school in 3rd century BCE. The name literally means the 
school "that believes everything exists" and believed that every­
thing could be reduced to "atoms" (actually, 75 dharmas) and these 
atoms making up objects actually exist. They were later absorbed 
by the Vaibashika school. 
shamatha (Tib. shinay) Tranquility or calm-abiding meditation in 
which one usually follows the breath and observes the workings of 
the mind. The main purpose of Shamatha meditation is to settle or 
tame the mind so that it will stay where one places it. 
155 
S bentong and Rangtong: Two Views of Emptiness 
Shantarakshita (eighth century CE) An abbot ofNalanda University 
invited by King Trisong Detsen to come to Tibet to help introduce 
Buddhism. He oversaw the building of the first monastery in Tibet. 
Shantideva (675-725 CE) A Mahayanist who lived in 7th and 8th cen­
tury in India known for his great work The Bodhisattva:., Way of 
Life. 
shastra The Buddhist teachings are divided into words of the Buddha 
(the sutras) and the commentaries of masters on his works (the 
shastras). 
shravaka Literally "those who hear" meaning disciples practicing the 
Foundation vehicle to become arhats. 
Shentong school (Tib.) The Madhyamaka or Middle-way school is di­
vided into two major schools: the Rangtong and Shentong. The 
distinction is that Rangtong primarily emphasizes emptiness, and 
Shentong primarily emphasizes clear wisdom. 
siddhi Spiritual powers of accomplished practitioners. 
Six Yogas of Naropa These six special yogic practices were transmit­
ted from Naropa to Marpa and are advanced practices which con­
sist of the yoga ofinner heat, the illusory body, the dream yoga, the 
yoga of clear light, the ejection of consciousness, and the bardo 
practice. 
sojong vows A practice whereby one holds eight vows for a 24 hour pe­
riod. 
spiritual song (Skt. doha) A religious song spontaneously composed 
by a Vajrayana practitioner expressing an experience of realiza­
tion. 
sutras These are the Foundation vehicle and Mahayana texts which 
are the words of the Buddha. These are often contrasted with the 
tantras. 
Svatrantrika One of the two main schools ofMadhyamaka Buddhism 
whose main representatives were Bhavaviveka and Santarakshita. 
The other main school is the Prasangika school. 
Sutra-school (Skt. sautrantika). One of the four major schools of In­
dian Buddhism. This is a Foundation vehicle school which believes 
that external phenomena are real and that our internal conscious­
ness is also real, but the understanding of self is illusory. 
tantra One can divide Tibetan Buddhism into the sutra tradition and 
the tantra tradition. The sutra tradition primarily involves the study 
156 
The Glossary 
of the Foundation vehicle and Mahayana texts. The tantric path 
primarily involves the Vajrayana practices. The tantras are prima­
rily the texts of these practices. 
Taranatha ( 1575-1634 CE) Leading teacher of the Jonangpa school 
and best known for his History of Buddhism in India. 
Tathagata-garbha Literally, "the nature of the ones thus gone" trans­
lated into English as "Buddha-nature" or "Buddha-essence." It is 
the seed that all beings possess and it is this essence which allows 
them to eventually attain Buddhahood. 
three natures These are the imaginary nature (Skt. parikalpita), the 
dependent nature (Skt. paratantra), and the completely perfect na­
ture (Skt. parinishpanna). 
three spheres This is the interaction between objects on the conven­
tional level with one sphere being the giver, one the receiver, and 
one the thing received. 
three vehicles These are the three levels of practice as described in Ti­
betan Buddhism. The Foundation vehicle emphasizes the Four 
Noble Truths and individual liberation from suffering. The Ma­
hayana emphasizes the view of emptiness of the phenomenal 
world. The third level is the Vajrayana which emphasizes reaching 
awakening using methods such as deity practice. 
Tilopa (928-1 009 CE) One of the eighty-four mahasiddhas. He was 
the guru of Naropa, who transmitted Tilopa 's teachings to Marpa 
and eventually to the Kagyu lineage in Tibet. 
tirthika A religious person who believes in a personal self. 
true nature of phenomena (Skt. dharmadhatu) The all-encompass­
ing space, unoriginated and without beginning, out of which all 
phenomena arise. The Sanskrit means "the essence of phenomena" 
and the Tibetan means "the expanse of phenomena" but usually it 
refers to the emptiness, which is the essence of phenomena. 
Tsongkhapa ( 1357-1419 CE) The founder of the Gelugpa school ofTi­
betan Buddhism. 
Tushita A pure land where the historical Buddha resided before com­
ing down to earth to teach and where the Maitreya Buddha resides. 
It is also a god realm in the desire realms. 
Vaibashika A Foundation school closely related to the Saravastivada 
school. They flourished in Gandhara and Kashmir and their name 
came from their main text the Mahavibhasa. 
157 
Shentong and Rangtong: Two Views of Emptiness 
vajra Usually translated "diamond-like" or "indestructible." This may 
be an implement held in the hand during certain Vajrayana cere­
monies, or it can refer to a quality which is so pure and so endur­
ing that it is like a diamond. 
Vajrapani A major bodhisattva said to be lord of the mantra and a 
major protector of Tibetan Buddhism. 
Vajravarahi A dakini who is the consort of Chakrasamvara. She is 
one of the main yidams of the Kagyu lineage and the embodiment 
of wisdom. 
Vajrayana There are three major traditions of Buddhism (Foundation 
vehicle, Mahayana, Vajrayana) The Vajrayana is based on the 
tantras and emphasizes the clarity aspect of phenomena. 
Vinaya There are three main divisions of the Buddhist teachings in the 
Foundation level: the sutras (teachings of the Buddha), the Vinaya 
(the rules of discipline and vows), and the Abhidharma (the clas­
sification of physical and psychological factors). 
wheel of dharma The Buddha's teachings correspond to three levels: 
the Foundation vehicle, the Mahayana and the Vajrayana with each 
being one turning of the wheel. 
Wheel of dharma According to the Shentong view, there are three 
turnings of the wheel of dharma with the first turning emphasizing 
the individual liberation, the second turning being the Mahayana 
teachings emphasizing emptiness, and the third being the empha­
sis on Buddha-nature. 
Yogachara school The name for the school that descended from 
Maitreya and Asanga. 
158 
Tibetan Glossary 
Tibetan word Tibetan SJ!.ellin~ Mean in~ 
bag chag bag chags karmic latencies 
che ta chad Ita nihilism 
cho chos dharma 
chod chod chod practice 
dagme bdag med egolessness 
dag nyi bdag nyid self or atman 
drenpa dran pa mindfulness 
ganden dga' ldan Tush ita 
Guru Rinpoche gu ru rin po che Padmasambhava 
Kagyu bka' brgyud Kagyu lineage 
Kangyur bka' 'gyur Kangyur 
mangpa rna ng pa ignorance 
man ngak man ngag oral instructions 
ngedon nges don definitive meaning 
nyon mong nyon mongs disturbing emotions 
phung po nga phung po lnga five aggregates 
Rangtong rang stong Rangtong 
nmay ris med Eclectic movement 
salwa gsal ba luminous clarity 
sang gye sangs rgyas Buddha 
semJung sems byung mental event 
seshin sesh bzhin alertness 
Shentong gzhan stong Shentong 
shinay zhi gnas tranquility meditation 
tak ta rtag Ita eternal ism 
tong pa nyi stong pa nyid emptiness 
tulku sprulsku nirmanakaya 
159 
Shentong and Rangtong: Two Views of Emptiness 
Books by Thrangu Rinpoche 
THE THREE VEHICLES OF BUDDHIST PRACTICE. This book gives 
an overview of the Hinayana, Mahayana, and Vajrayana as it was 
practiced in Tibet. 
THE MIDDLE-WAY MEDITATION INSTRUCTIONS OF MIPHAM. This 
great Tibetan scholar who actually stayed for a while with the pre­
vious Thrangu Rinpoche at his monastery describes how one de­
velops compassion and then expands this to bodhichitta and 
eventually develops prajna or wisdom. 
TRANSCENDING EGO: DISTINGUISHING CONSCIOUSNESS FROM 
WISDOM. This book, which includes the original text of the Third 
Karmapa and Thrangu Rinpoche 's commentary, describes in detail 
the eight consciousnesses and how these transform into the five 
wisdoms at enlightenment. 
THE PRACTICE OF TRANQUILITY AND INSIGHT. This book is a prac­
tical guide to the two types of meditation that form the core of Bud­
dhist spiritual practice. 
CREATION AND COMPLETION: ESSENTIAL POINTS OF TANTRIC 
MEDITATION. This is a brilliant text by Jamgon Kongtrul the Great 
on the two main aspects of Vajrayana practice. Included is the Ti­
betan script, Sarah Harding's translation of the root text, her ex­
tensive notes on the translation, and Thrangu Rinpoche's 
commentary on the text. 
MEDICINE BUDDHA TEACHINGS. An extremely detailed treatment of 
the Medicine Buddha practice which contains a new translation of 
the sadhana, Thrangu Rinpoche's instructions and commentary on 
the practice and also a detailed explanation of the sutra The Twelve 
Aspirations of the Medicine Buddha. 
Namo Buddha Publications carries all the teachings ofThrangu 
Rinpoche in English. including 32 books, 9 dharma booklets, 1 0 
DVD sets of Rinpoche's teachings, 36 sets MP3 audio teachings, 
125 sets of audio cassettes, several practice materials, and many 
free downloads. 
For more information: www.NamoBuddhaPublications.com. 
160 
Bibliography 
THE SUTRAS 
Perfection of Wisdom Literature (Skt. Prajnaparamita) A large body 
of Buddhist literature which is said to have been found by Nagar­
juna. There is a Prajnaparamita text of 1 00,000 verses, a text of 
25,000 verses, a text of8,000 verses. The Perfection ofWisdom in 
8,000 verses (Skt. ashtasahasrika-prajna-paramita-sutra) has been 
translated by Edward Conze. The Large Sutra on Perfect Wisdom. 
Berkeley: University of California Press, 1975. 
The Heart Sutra. (Skt. maha-prajnaparamita-mitahriidaya-sutra). A 
sutra by the Buddha which is a condensation of the Prajnaparamita 
and is chanted daily in many Mahayana centers. 
Aryadeva The closest pupil of Nagarjuna, who became his heir. He 
was born in Sri Lanka and wrote the Four Hundred Verses (Skt. 
Catuhshakate). This has been translated by Ruth Sonam as 
Aryadeva's Four Hundred Stanzas On The Middle Way (Snow 
Lion). 
Bhavaviveka (490 to 570 CE) His works include the Lamp of Wisdom 
(Skt. Prajna-Pradipa-Mulamadhyamaka-vritti) and Blaze of Rea­
soning (Skt. Madhyamaka-hridaya karika-vritti tarka-jvala) which 
have not been translated. 
Brunnholzl Center of the Moonlit Sky (Snow Lion, 2004) Karl 
Brunnholzl has written comprehensively on the Middle-way phi­
losophy from the point ofview of several masters who present the 
Shentong view. 
Chandrakirti Introduction to the Middle Way (Skt. madhyamaka­
vatara) One of most celebrated Indian works on the study of empti­
ness written in verse. It has ten chapters describing each of the 
161 
Shentong and RanJ!,Iong: Two Views of Emptiness 
bodhisattva levels. Regarded in Tibetan Buddhism as the most au­
thoritative text of the Madhyamaka Prasangika view. See Intro­
duction to the Middle Way for a translation of the root text and 
commentary by Mipham Rinpoche (Shambhala, 2002). 
He also wrote the The Lucid Words (Skt. mula-madhyamaka­
ritti-prasanna-pada) which is a commentary on Nagarjuna's Mula­
madhyama-kakarika 
Dolpopa Mountain Doctrine (Snow Lion, 2004, translated by Jeffrey 
Hopkins) This is a translation of Dolpopa's major work which 
began the Shenong view of emptiness. This book is difficult read­
ing and an easier summary of Dolpopa 's works is Stern's book. 
S. K. Hookham The Buddha Within (Sri Satguru Publications, 199 I) 
This was one of the first books published in English that presented 
the Shentong view and discussed this in relation to the Ut­
taratantra. 
Jamgon Kongtrul Lodro Thaye The Compendium of Knowledge 
(Tib. shes-bya kun-khyab-mdzod) Snow Lion Publications has been 
publishing this work in a series of individual books. 
THE FIVE WORKS OF MAITREYA 
I. The Ornament of Mahayana Discourses (Skt. mahayana-sutra­
lamkara). This work consists of twenty-one chapters and is writ­
ten in verse. It covers a discussion of Buddha-nature, refuge in the 
three jewels, the Mahayana paths, and the doctrine of emptiness. 
2. The Ornament of Clear Realization (Skt. abhisamaya-lamkara). 
This work is a verse commentary on the Prajnaparamita literature 
and is divided into eight vajra topics. This text is studied in all four 
Tibetan lineages and is used in the study of the sutra system. See 
The Ornament of Clear Realization for Tibetan text, a translation 
of the root text, and a commentary by Thrangu Rinpoche (Zhyisil 
Chokyi Ghatsal, 2004) 
3. Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes (Skt. madhyanta-vib­
haga). This work is a commentary expounding primarily on the 
Chittamatra school of Buddhism, especially the Shentong school. 
162 
The text explores etemalism and nihilism and why these are not 
part of the Middle-way. 
4. Distillguishillg Dharma from Dharmata (Skt. dharma-dharmata­
vibhaga). A commentary on the tathagata-garbha doctrine and the 
Chittamatra school of thought. See Distinguishing Dharma and 
Dharmata for the Tibetan text, a translation of the root text, and a 
commentary by Thrangu Rinpoche (Zhysil Chokyi Ghatsal, 2003). 
5. The Uttaratalltra (Skt. Mahayana-sutrantra-shastra). This work is 
written in verse and has seven vajra points. It is mainly a com­
mentary on the three jewels, the seed of Buddha-nature which is in­
herent in all sentient beings, and the attributes and activities of the 
Buddha. It particularly deals with the subject of Buddha-nature and 
the development of the realization of the nature of phenomena 
through the purification of the disturbing emotions. See The Ut­
tara Tantra: A Treatise on Buddha-nature for the Tibetan text, a 
translation of the root text, and a commentary by Thrangu Rin­
poche (Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal, 2003). 
NAGARJUNA 
Treatise Oil the Middle Way called Wisdom (Skt.prajna-mula­
madhyamaka-karika) This is Nagarjuna's most famous thesis and 
is the basis for the study of emptiness. It has been translated by F. 
J. Strong as Emptiness (Abingdon, 1967). 
Letter to a Frielld (Skt. suhrillekha). This has been translated as Na­
gmjuna s Letter to King Gautamiputra Translated by Jamspal, 
Chophel, Santina ( Motilal Banarsidass) 
The Go/dell Rosary: The Precious Garlalld (Skt. Rajapari-Katha­
ratnevali). Translated as Nagmjuna s Precious Garland by Jeffrey 
Hopkins (Snow Lion, 2009). 
In Praise of the Dharmadhatu. One of texts of Nagarjuna which is 
said to support the Shentong view. This book has been translated 
by Karl Brunnholzl as In Praise of Dharmadhatu with an added 
commentary by Rangjung Dorje, the Third Karmapa (Snow Lion, 
2008). 
Patrul Rinpoche ( 1808-1887 CE) A famous Nyingma teacher who 
wrote The Words of My Perfect Teacher. Translated by Padmakara 
163 
Shentong and RangtonJ!,: Two Vie1vs rif Emptiness 
Translation Group (Shambhala Publications). 
Sarah a A So11g for the Ki11g. Saraha is credited with being the first 
person to write about Mahamudra meditation. He wrote three 
spiritual songs-the King :s Doha, the Queen :s Doha, and the Cit­
izen :s Doha each explaining a different aspect of Mahamudra 
meditation. The Song for the King contains the Tibetan doha, a 
translation of the doha, and a commentary by Thrangu Rinpoche 
ofthe King's Doha (Wisdom, 2006). 
Shantideva The Way of the Bodhisattva. Shantideva wrote one of 
the most celebrated works on how a Mahayana Buddhist should 
conduct him-or herself in a set of beautiful verses still quoted 
today. This text has been translated many times. one is The Way 
of the Bodhisattva translated by the Padmakara Translation 
Group (Shambhala, 1997). 
Cyrus Stearns The Buddha from Dolpo. The first detailed account 
ofDolpopa's contribution to the Shentong. Motilal Banarsidass, 
1999. 
Taranatha ( 1575-1634 CE) Leading teacher of the Jonangpa school 
and best known for his History of Buddhism in India.Translated 
by Lama Chimpa as Taranatha~<; History of Buddhism in India 
(Motilal, 2004) 
THRANGU RINPOCHE 
011 Buddha Esse11ce This is one of the treatises by Rangjung Dorje, 
the Third Karmapa on the Shentong view. Contains translation of the 
original treatise by Rangjung Dorje and a commentary by Thrangu 
Rinpoche (Shambhala, 2006) 
Trallscelldillg Ego: Disti11guishillg Collscious11ess. This is the sec­
ond treatise by Rangjung Dorje on the Shentong. Contains a transla­
tion of the root text and a commentary by Thrangu Rinpoche (Namo 
Buddha Publications, 200 I). 
164 
The Index 
32 major characteristics 63 
Abhidharma 77, 113, 114, 120 
Ahhidharmakosha 45 
accumulation of merit 40-41, 54-
56,60-61, 77, 137 
accumulation of wisdom 54-55, 61-
62 
adventitious stains 9, 62 
aggregates 27, 28, 31, 80, 98-99 
Asanga 4, 5, 6, 8, 18, 68, 113-114, 
118-120, 124 
atoms 3, 45, 82-85 
beginningless 52, 59, 61 
belief in a self 16-17, 20, 30-33, 40, 
75-76,80,90-92,94,122 
bodhichitta 55,66-67, 103 
bodhisattva level66-67, 116, 119-
120,129 
bodhisattvas 61, 75, 134 
Brahma 16 
Buddha-nature 4-5, 8-9, 18-20, 33, 
40, 62, 68, 115-118, 120-121, 126 
Buddhahood 16, 20-21, 23-24, 57, 
62, 63, 64, 69, 70, 71, 72, 77, 79, 
115-118,126,137-138 
cause and effect 41, 44, 45, I 04, 
133 
Chakrasamvara 77, 127 
Chandrakirti 7, 36, 876-88, 95, 
109-110 
Citizens Doha 136 
composite 28, 35, 37-38, 51-52, 58, 
60-61, 66, 88 
conduct 3, 6, 23-24, 39-40, 44-46, 
54-56, 80, 118, 137 
165 conventional level of reality 15, 23-
24, 39-40, 44-46, 53, 58-59, 68, 
IIO-III,I33 
dharmadhatu 24,57-58,61, 101, 
115, 120, 126, 140, 141 
dharmakaya 63-64 
disturbing emotions 9, 16-17, 23, 
27,30,34,66,67, 70,72-73,79, 
80,95, 102,116-117,127,138 
Doha of Naropa 136 
Doha ofTilopa 136 
egolessness of phenomena 28, 42, 
47, 54, 66-67, 74-76, 78-81, 84-86, 
88, 97, 101-105, 107, 118 
egolessness of the individual 17, 
24,27,42,47,66-67, 73,75-76, 
78-79, 84, 89-90,92,97, 101, 103-
105, 107, 118 
eight consciousnesses 92, 122 
Eighth Tai Situpa 125, 128, 130 
etemalism 39, 42, 52, 64 
Foundation vehicle I, 2, 16-17,24, 
40-41,62,64,66-67,81,97, 102-
103, 109 
Four Noble Truths 31, 40 
four seals 35, 65, 66 
fourteen emptinesses 58-64 
Gargyi Wangpo 125, 128 
Golden Rosmy 80 
Great Exposition school 2, 40, 41, 
42,45,66,81,82,83,84,85,96 
Heart Sutra 17 
Hevajra 77, 127 
ignorance II, 23-24, 28-29, 31-34, 
133 
impermanence 36 
lndra 16 
interdependent origination 53, 58 
Jamgon Kongtrul 15, 23, 25, 27, 
35, 39, 47, 69, 75, 94, 118,120, 
125, 128, 134, 135, 140 
Kagyu lineage 78 
Shentong and Rangtong: Two Views of Emptiness 
Kangyur 18, 19 
Kings Doha 136 
latencies 42, 43, 46, 56, 122, 123 
luminous clarity (luminosity) 2-4, 
7-9, 11-13, 15-16,21,24-25,38-39, 
44, 48, 54-55, 61, 68-69, 74, 76-79, 
91-94,99-100, 121, 126-128, 130, 
132-133, 136-139, 141 
Mula-madhyamaka-prajna 136 
Mahamudra 12, 77, 134 
Mahayana 17, 24, 42, 44, 46, 62, 
64, 66, 68, 96, I 02, 114 
Marpa 69, 78, 136, 138 
meditation 2-4, 7-9, 11-13, 15-16, 
21,24-25,38-39,44,48,54-55,61, 
68-69,74,76-79,91-94,99-100, 
121, 126-128. 130, 132-133, 136-
139, 141 
Middle-way 2, 3, 6-8, 15-16, 19, 
39,40,42,44,46-54, 77,81,85-
88,97-99, 105-107, 109-122, 125, 
128 
Mikyo Dmje (8th Karmapa) 19 
Milarepa 69, 77, 136, 138 
Mind-only school 5-7, 40, 42-44, 
46,56,68,81,84-86,88,96 
Nagarjuna 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 18, 21, 
68, 80, 86, 87, 88, 106, 107 109-
110, 118-120, 136 
Naropa 7, 69, 77, 78, 136, 138 
nihilism 39, 42, 52, 64, I 07 
nirmanakaya 63 
nirvana 35, 37, 38, 52, 66, 70 
Ornament ofC/ear Realization 135 
path of liberation 92, 126, 130 
path of methods 92, 126, 130 
Prajnaparamita 2, 3, 17, 53, 77, 86, 
125, 126, 133, 134, 136 
Prajnaparamita sutra 17, 53, 86, 
136 
pratyekabuddhas 64, 75, 118, 102, 
134 
166 Queen s Doha 136 
Rangjung Dorje (3rd Karmapa) 9 
realists 81, 82, 83, 84 
Rolpai Dorje (4th Karmapa) 139 
rupakaya 63 
sambhogakaya 63 
Saraha 76, 136 
Shamatha (Tranquility) meditation 
92-93, 126 
Shantideva 76 
shastras 18-19, 135-136 
shravakas 64, 75, 84, I 02, 118, 134 
six Yogas ofNaropa 8, 77 
sixteen emptinesses 48-53, 58, 66, 
69, 79, 109, 128 
spiritual songs (dohas) 136 
subtle channels 129 
subtle heat (tummo) 129 
subtle egolessness 67, 75-76, 79, 
85,90-91 
sutras and sutra tradition 1-2, 7-8, 
17-18,25-27,29,41,45,48,70, 
77-78,86,96, 121, 126, 128-129, 
132, 134-139 
Sutra-school (Sautrantika) 2, 40-
42, 45, 66, 81-82, 84-86, 96, II 0 
sutras 2, 8, 17, 18, 24, 25, 27, 29, 
41, 45, 48, 77, 86, 121, 126, 128, 
132, 135-137 
tantric practice 2, 7-8, 25, 48, 69, 
77-78,92, 121, 125-130 
three kinds of suffering 19 
union of appearances and empti­
ness 128-129, 131 
Uttaratantra Shastra 4, 8, 68, 114-
118, 128 
wheel of Dharma 2, 4-5, 16-19, 
112, 120, 124-125,146 
Namo Buddha Publications 
Nama Buddha Publications was founded in 1987 for the purpose 
of preserving and publishing all the works ofThrangu Rinpoche. 
Nama Buddha is Thrangu Rinpoche's non-profit organization. No 
persons working for it have been paid a salary with all profits going 
to collecting and publishing Rinpoche 's works. 
Nama Buddha Publications began by collecting all the audio tapes 
ofRinpoche's teachings. Presently, it holds over I ,500 audio tapes 
of teachings of Rinpoche that have an English translation. 
Almost half of these teachings have been transcribed and published 
as books. As of2009, there are thirty-three books and nine Dharma 
booklets by Thrangu Rinpoche available and all of these can be 
found on the Nama Buddha Publications website: 
www.NamoBuddhaPublications.com. 
In more recent years, Nama Buddha Publications has added 15 
DVD teachings of Thrangu Rinpoche. These DVDs give a com­
plete video record of seminars taught by Thrangu Rinpoche with 
Rinpoche teaching and the translator translating running from 15 
to 20 hours for a week program. 
For those who want these teachings in an audio form Nama Bud­
dha Publications has added 30 COs which give the same English 
and Tibetan of Rinpoche 's teachings except in a MP3 format for 
only$ 15.00 a teaching. 
Finally, Nama Buddha Publications has made a set of high quality 
photos of thangkas for a reasonable price to help students visual­
ize in their practice. 
Anyone wanting to help Namo Buddha-in converting tapes to 
MP3s, transcribing, editing, graphic design, website design, 
or advertising-please contact Nama Buddha Publications 
167 
Shentong and RanJ?,tong: Two Vie1vs of Emptiness 
The Vajra Vidya Retreat Center 
in Crestone, Colorado 
The Care of Dharma Books 
Dharma books contain the teachings of the Buddha and 
so they have the power to protect against lower birth 
and to point the way to liberation. 
Therefore Dharma texts should be treated with respect, 
kept off the floor and places where people sit or walk 
and they are not to be stepped over. They should be 
covered or protected for transporting and kept in a 
high, clean place separate from more "ordinary" things. 
If it is necessary to dispose of dharma materials they 
should be burned with care and awareness rather than 
thrown in the trash. When burning Dharma texts, it is 
traditional to recite a prayer or mantras such as OM, 
AH, HUNG. Then visualize the letters of the text being 
burned as being absorbed in an AH with the AH then 
being absorbed into you. After that you can burn the 
texts. 
168 

snentone & Ranetone: 
TWO VIEWS OF EMPTINESS 
The Mahayana path of Buddhism requires the development of vast 
loving-kindness and compassion . The foundation for developing 
impartial compassion for all sentient beings is based on under­
standing the emptiness of self and the emptiness of phenomena. 
Tllrangu Rinpoche wa bom in 
Tibet. Aft r escaping to India in 
1959, he helped e tab/i h the 
curriculum for the Kanno Kagyu 
lineage under rite 16th Kannapa. 
He ha taught the major 
tulkus of the lineage. establi Ired 
mona. teries ill N pal a11d lltdia 
and ct up Buddhi t center. ;, 
the Far Ea.st, German)~ England, 
USA and Canada. He is known 
for taking difficult topic and 
making them acce sib/e to prtlc­
tioners. He i author of numer­
ous books ill 7ibetan and 
Chinese ilrcluding Ol'Cr .30 books 
in Engli lr. He i also pre ently 
one of tire major tutor of til 
I 7th Karmopa. In Shentong and Rangtong, Thrangu 
Rinpoche begins with a lucid descrip­
tion of the four major schools of 
Buddhism and their tenets. Each school 
had its own view of reality and 
Rinpoche describes the similarities and 
differences of these views. 
The Middle-way path had two im­
portant schools in Tibet: the Shentong 
and the Rangtong . In the discussion 
of Rangtong , Rinpoche shows how 
important it is to understand the 
emptiness of persons and of phenom­
ena because this understanding helps 
develop an accurate view of the world 
and thus how to proceed in one's 
practice. 
In the discussion of Shentong , 
Rinpoche describes the empty, lu­
minous clarity of mind and how this is 
developed in meditation . This clarity is 
also closely related to understanding 
Buddha-nature and meditation in the 
Vajrayana. 
Thrangu Rinpoche bases this discussion 
on Jamgon Kongtrul's encyclopedic 
text The Treasury of Knowledge . 
Philosophy I Eastern Rei~ ions ISBN r-1-mm-117
-3 
Namo Buddha Publications $ 13.95 US II 
Printed in the USA 
9 781931 571173 
