
The mahiisiddha Saraha 
SARAHA ON MAHAMUDRA MEDITATION 
COMMENTARY 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
TRANSLATOR OF THE SONG AND EDITOR 
MICHELE MARTIN 
TRANSLATOR OF THE ORAL COMMENTARY 
PETER O'HEARN 
WrsooM PuBLICATIONS • BosToN 
Wisdom Publications, Inc. 
199 Elm Srreer 
Somerville MA 02144 USA 
www. wisdompubs.org 
Commentary© 2006 byThrangu Rinpoche. 
'Roar rexr, outline, apparatus, and introduction © 2006 by Michele Marrin. 
All rights reserved. 
No parr of chis book may be reproduced in any form or by any means, electronic or 
mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any informacion storage and 
retrieval system or technologies now known or Iacer developed, without permission 
in writing from the publisher. 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Thrangu, Rinpoche, 1933-
Song for the King : Saraha on mahamudra meditation f. commentary, Khenchen 
Thrangu Rinpoche ; rranslaror of the Song and editor, Michele Martin ; translator 
of the oral commentary, Peter O'Hearn. 
p.cm. 
Includes bibliographical references. 
ISBN o-86171-503-9 (pbk. : alk. paper) 
1. Sarahapada, 8th cent. Dohakosa. 2. Religious life-Buddhism. 3· Mahamudra 
(Tanrric rite) I. Sarahapada, 8th cent. Dohakosa. English. II. Martin, Michele, 1942-
III. O'Hearn, Peter, 1959-IV.1icle. 
BQ7775.S263T57 2oo6 
294·3'4435-dC22 
ISBN o-86171-503-9 
10 09 o8 07 o6 
4 3 2 1 2006000538 
Cover designed by Eli2abeth Lawrence. 
Back cover photo by Michele Martin: Thrangu Rinpoche on retreat at a Guru Rin­
poche cave in the Helambu region of Nepal's Himalayas. 
Interior designed by Gopa & Ted2, Inc. Set in Adobe Garamond 11.25/16.8. 
Frontispiece: The maj,.asiddha Saraha; eastern 1ibet, eighteenth century, opaque 
watercolor on cotton. Detail from a tangka of four mahasiddhas, © 2006 Museum 
of Fine Arts, Boston. 
Wisdom Publications' books are printed on acid-free paper and meet the guidelines 
for permanence and durability of the Committee for Production Guidelines for Book 
Longevity of the Council on Library Resources. 
Primed in the United. States of America . 
.._ This book was produced with environmental mindfulness. We have elected co "I print this ride on 50% PCW recycled paper. As a result, we have saved the fol­
lowing resources: 17 trees, 786 lbs. of solid waste, 6,u9 gallons of water, 1,474lbs. of 
greenhouse gases, and 12 million BTUs of energy. For more information, please visit 
our web site, www.wisdompubs.org. 
Contents 
Editor's Introduction 
1. Approaching Mahamudra 
2. The Song Begins 
3. Ground Mahamudra 
4. Path Mahamudra 
5. Fruition Mahamudrii 
Appendixes 
1. A Song for the King with Karma Trinlepa's Outline 
2. A Song for the King in Tibetan 
3. A Comparison of the Root Texts 
4. Some Reflections on Dran med 
Notes 
Glossary 
Bibliography 
A Brief Biography ofThrangu Rinpoche 
v 1 
9 
17 
45 
79 
115 
123 
141 
153 
157 
161 
167 
181 
184 
For the Seventeenth Gyalwang Karmapa, 
Ogyen Trinley Dorje 
May his life be long and fruitful 
May compassion like his unfold 
in 
the hearts of every living being 
Editor's Introduction 
S ARAHA HAS INSPIRED SEEKERS OF TRUTH for centuries with his spir­
itual songs and the legends of his life. Prominent among the eighty­
four masters oflndia, he lived most probably in ninth-century Bengal.' 
Tradition holds that Saraha was the first to introduce mahamudra as rhe 
central practice of meditation/ and irs relevance along with irs lineage 
continue to the present day. On his visits to the West in the 1970s, the 
Sixteenth Karmapa, Rangjung Rigpe Dorje, recommended mahamudra 
because it transcends all cultural barriers. The essence of Buddhist med­
itation is to tame our mind, and mahamudra practice does this through 
working directly with mind's nature, which is found to be the same in 
all living beings. Once this nature has been recognized, awareness of it 
is sustained in every situation, from meditation sessions to all facets of 
daily life. Over time, whatever arises is experienced as clear and fresh, 
beyond expression, and transparent to its radiant, empty nature. 
Woven with analogies, spontaneous song is a natural medium for 
the expression of this ultimate reality. For this reality cannot be captured 
by a net of words and concepts but only indicated through the oblique 
lines of allusion. Metaphors have the capacity to evoke an experiential 
reality that transcends the intellect, and so they are not only a teaching 
tool to deepen understanding but an opening into another dimension. 
Saraha sang his songs to bring his listeners to enlightenment. 
2 A SONG FOR THE KING 
Thrangu Rinpoche's commentary belongs to the living oral tradition 
in which these verses began. Given in Colorado during the summer of 
2002, his talks range from the basic points to the most subtle, all of 
which he has chosen for their relevance to meditation practice. The style 
of presentation reflects the oral tradition, which comes around to a topic 
from different directions, allowing this repetition to settle an idea more 
deeply into our minds. The tone is close to conversational, flowing in a 
timeless setting of spiritual friend and disciples. Thrangu Rinpoche 
based his explanations on a text by Karma Trinlepa (1456-1539), who 
has written the most extensive commentaries on Saraha's trilogy-his 
spiritual songs for the people, the queen, and the king. 
A Song for the King is the shortest of the three compositions and the 
most profound, for it presents in greatest detail Saraha's unique interpre­
tation of mahamudra. The eminent Kagyii scholar Pawo Tsuglalc Trengwa 
(1504-66) wrote that the songs correspond to the three kiiyas, or dimen­
sions: A Song for the People relates to the nirmar:akaya; A Song for the 
Queen relates to the sambhogakaya, and, finally, A Songfor the King relates 
to the dharmakaya, which makes it the most subtle and succinct. 3 
In their Indian form, songs of realization were presented in a flow of 
·Verses without an overt structure. It was the Tibetan commentaries that 
added the outlines and gave a topography to the landscape the songs 
explored. In particular, Karma Trinlepa's outline is quite detailed and 
could actually serve as a summary of his whole commentary. 
To introduce the song, let us look at an overview. At the beginning, 
Karma Trinlepa uses the occasion of the traditional homage to elucidate 
four major obstacles to practice. This discussion functions as the tradi­
tional preliminaries for a text or practice. Following this, he presents the 
usual precis of a text, which alerts the reader to the range of its content, 
by dividing the verses into a summary of mahamudra, according to 
ground, path, and fruition. He then returns to each one of these for an 
extensive discussion as he builds the rest of his commentary. 
EDITOR'S INTRODUCTION 3 
In the longer presentation, Saraha's verses on the ground start with 
his advice to keep it clear of attachment, especially to the various signs 
of accomplishment that might arise from practice. This is a theme 
that runs throughout the song, as these attachments are the basic way 
that we deviate from an authentic path. In all the major manuals on 
mahamudra, instructions on how to practice are followed by descrip­
tions of how to avoid obstacles-all the diversions and sidetracks that 
lead us astray. Saraha distributes these cautions liberally throughout 
his song. 
After warning us of dangers, Saraha defines classic. concepts, such as 
the nonduality of appearance and emptiness, and then he points out the 
essential nature of mind. When we are meditating, it is important· to 
know what we are seeking, for this goal will guide the whole process of 
practice. Therefore, in the beginning Saraha points to ultimate reality, 
the fruition that is the realization of mind's very nature. Finally, he speaks 
about cause and effect, which constitute the level of relative truth, and 
about the perils of fixating on scholastic analysis. 
Having provided this ground, Saraha begins his mapping of the path 
with another series of verses on the dangers of attachment, in particular 
the peril of taking meditative experience to be something real and truly 
existent. Once this is complete, Saraha sets forth the actual path through 
his unique presentation of mahamudra, laid out as the four symbols or 
stages of practice: (1) mindfulness, (2) nonminding, (3) the unborn, and 
(4) beyond the intellect. 
In his commentary on A Song for the People, Karma Trinh!pa gives a 
detailed explanation of these four stages in increasingly subtle levels. 4 
Since the third and secret one has been emphasized by Thrangu Rin­
poche and prefigures the discussion in this book, it might be useful to 
look at it briefly. In A Song for the People, Saraha's verse reads: 
4 A SONG FOR THE KING 
... the four stages: mindfulness, nonminding, the unborn, and 
beyond the intellect. Among these, I first teach mindfulness. 
As you drinkthe elixir of nonminding, apprehending "I" and 
"mine" is forgotten. 
Whoever realizes that mind itself is forever unborn will come to 
know the reality of the single letter A, the unborn. 
Ultimately beyond the intellect, the nature of mind knows neither 
name nor symbol. 5 
Karma Trinlepa explains that this verse indicates how to realize mind's 
abiding nature to be "uncontaminated," which means free of mental 
pollution, or "beyond the intellect," the final of the four stages. The 
three stages leading up to this begin with mindfulness, which Karma 
Trinlepa defines as a practice that cuts through the root of the mind. 
What this might mean is described by another master: 
Cutting through elaborations from without or from within­
There is not only one, but many ways to teach the view. 
Nevertheless, just as dousing a fire naturally stops its smoke, 
It is more profound to cut through the roots of your mind from 
within. 6 
Here, the cutting through of mindfulness means to calm the busyness of 
proliferating concepts. This reins in a distracted, overactive mind and 
brings it into a more tranquil state. 
The next stage, nonminding, is an extension of the first. Karma Trin­
lepq. writes that to rest in a state free of mental activity is to drink the 
elixir of nonminding; this induces an experience in which the concepts 
that grasp onto "I" and "mine" slip from our mind. Since apprehending 
an "I"-the actual basis for the afflictions-is no longer present, Saraha 
states that the mind is "completely purified of all afflictions." Thus freed, 
EDITOR'S INTRODUCTION 
we are no longer depressed by faults or inflated by positive qualities. 
The ups and downs of that rollercoaster ride have ended. (Appendix 4, 
"Some Reflections on Dran med," gives an extended discussion of non­
minding.) 
Through abiding in this second stage, we come to the third, the 
unborn. With the aid of the key instructions, we realize a deeper real­
ity-the unborn emptiness that the letter A embodies. This is seeing 
that the mind itself is forever unborn and that this quality is all-perva­
sive; it is the very nature of our mind and of all phenomena. Karma 
Trinlepa states that with the realization of this unborn nature, samsara 
is transcended. 
Ultimately we arrive at the fourth stage, beyond the intellect. Karma 
Trinlepa explains that through the oral instructions we have practiced in 
the past, we have come to a realization that transcends even the name or 
symbol of the unborn: all these are liberated into a state beyond expres­
sion in thought or word/ 
These four stages of Saraha bear a close resemblance to the famous 
four yogas of mahamudra, which also chart a path to full awakening.8 
Since they resonate so dearly with one another, let us look briefly at 
how they interrelate and illuminate each other. 
The first yoga of one-pointedness has a quality of tranquility like 
Saraha's first stage of mindfulness, in which discursiveness is brought to 
rest. During the second yoga, free of elaborations, or simplicity, all expe­
rience dissolves into emptiness without leaving a trace. This resembles 
the second stage of nonminding when highs and lows no longer disturb 
our mind. During the third yoga of one taste, we realize that all phe­
nomena are appearance and emptiness inseparable. In Saraha's third stage 
of the unborn, we realize that our mind and all phenomena have the 
same nature, or embody the same taste. Everything is unborn. With the 
fourth yoga, nonmeditation, spontaneous presence is reached, and all 
subtle dualistic appearances utterly dissolve. This is also Saraha's fourth 
6 A SONG FOR THE KING 
stage, completely beyond the intellect; it is the ultimate that transcends 
expressiOn. 
After laying out these four stages, Saraha puts the final touches on his 
map of the journey to full awakening with another reminder of nonat­
tachment and clear advice on how to meditate: Realize that there is noth­
ing to negate, nothing to affirm, and nothing to be meditated upon. 
S'rnce mere recognition brings liberation, we simply continue, "recog­
nizing what is clear and unmoving." This will lead to the fruition of full 
awakening: Mind expands into vast wisdom, the five kayas appear, and 
benefits continually flow forth as the mind remains flawless and unob­
structed. Saraha concludes his verses with a vision of ultimate reality 
fully integrated and fully functioning within our relative world. 
* * * * 
This version of A Song for the King has been created with a varied read­
ership in mind. For the growing number of people who know Tibetan, 
the original text is reproduced. In an appendix, a scholarly translation is 
provided with Karma Trinlepa's detailed outline and interpolations from 
his commentary marked in brackets. This layout will also help those 
. who wish to work directly with the text in a traditional manner by recit­
ing and memorizing the verses. In the main body of the text with the 
verses accompanying Thrangu Rinpoche's commentary, the brackets 
have been removed for smoother reading, and the outline has been con­
densed to reflect the essential and Thrangu Rinpoche's emphasis. 
Nothing happens without the cooperation of many people, and I am 
grateful for their kind and generous assistance. David Germano found, 
copied, and sent the Tibetan manuscript of Karma Trinlepa's commen­
tary by courier to Kathmandu. Through the Tibetan Buddhist Resource 
Center, E. Gene Smith provided a copy of the root text. Peter O'Hearn 
gave his usual precise and eloquent oral translation and was wonderful 
to work with during the editing process. Cathy Jackson transcribed the 
EDITOR'S INTRODUCTION 7 
talks, Clark Johnson worked on early stages of the text, and the final 
polish was given by Tracy Davis. Perna Tsewang Shastri input the Tibetan 
root text and David Kittelstrom at Wisdom Publications has offered 
superb support throughout. In addtion to editing the commentary, I 
am responsible for the translation of the song and outline, the notes, 
glossary, and appendixes. At my doorstep as well sits whatever is mis­
taken, rough, or unclear. 
It is my hope that this book will inspire readers to practice maha­
mudra and that it will bring them great benefit all along the way to per­
fect and full awakening. 
Michele Martin 

Approaching Mahamudni 1 
"""" SAKYAMU NI BuDDHA taught in eighty-four thousand different ways. 
The authentic practice of any one of these teachings lc:ads to liber­
ation and omniscience in the long term, and in the short term it pacifies 
difficult situations , calms our minds, and fosters insight. Among all the 
teachings of the Buddha, from the early time of the KagyU lineage mas­
ters up to the present day, mahamudra has been selected as the princi­
pal teaching of the lineage. Due to its prominence, there are unusually 
profound instructions concerning this practice, which was considered 
the most beneficial. 
Mahamudra is also the easiest aspect of the teachings to implemenr, 
and its practice has produced a great number of realized masters. Espe­
cially now, with the flourishing of Buddhism in the West, mahamudra 
is an even more appropriate practice than it was in the past. I have found 
that many Westerners practice Dharma out of great inrerest and devo­
tion, and I feel that the only aspect of Dharma that will actually satisfy 
their hopes and aspirations is mahamudra, because it opens a direct path 
to realizing mind's nature and can be practiced in conjunction with any 
activity. 
When people practice Dharma, their individual circumstances greatly 
affect what they can and will do. Some people are able to practice with 
great intensity and great diligence in long retreats. Others with the same 
9 
IO A SONG FOR THE KING 
degree of faith and interest may lack the opportunity for such intense 
and prolonged practice. In teaching Dharma, we must fulfill the needs 
and hopes of both types of practitioner. Some people possess the 
resources and circumstances that allow them to become monastics and 
devote their lives to practice. Some people possess the resources that 
allow them to practice in long, intense retreats. But all of these practi­
tioners without exception are devoted to Dharma, and so they should 
have a system that equally enables and benefits their different kinds of 
Dharma practice. That system is mahamudra, and there is none better 
for all types of practitioners. 
An effective practice of mahamudra requires access to genuine texts 
of Dharma instruction. For over a thousand years, the uncommon, prac­
tical instructions of the Kagyii lineage have existed in Tibetan, but until 
recently the barrier oflanguage has come between Western students and 
mahamudra instructions. Now, through the diligent effort ofWestern 
students, major texts from the lineage have been translated and made 
available. 9 These texts are eminently practical and not cryptic or inac­
cessible. They provide appropriate solutions and responses to the vari­
ous types of experiences, both positive and negative, that might appear 
in our practice. With these new translations, we now have the necessary 
resources for understanding mahamudra practice. 
Saraha's Song for the King belongs to the lineage of mahamudra 
instruction, which comes to us in two ways: through a long lineage and 
a short one. The short or close lineage, which is better known, begins 
with the dharmakaya Vajradhara and passes on to Tilopa, Naropa, 
Marpa, and others. 10 The long lineage, which is found in many lineage 
supplications, also begins with Vajradhara and then goes to the bodhi­
sattva Ratnamati, the mahasiddha Saraha, Nagarjuna, and others, even­
tually down to Marpa.11 Saraha is an important link in this long lineage 
of mahamudra instructions, which continues unbroken down to the 
present day. 
APPROACHING MAHAMUDRA II 
Many of the compositions of the Indian mahasiddhas have been scat­
tered because they are separate, short texts, and therefore many have 
been lost. But due. to the kindness of the Seventh Gyalwang Karmapa, 
Chodrak Gyatso, the Indian sources for the mahamudra teachings have 
been preserved. He collected all of these compositions into three vol­
umes, which he tided Indian Sources of Mahamudra. They include the 
Buddha's original mahamudra teachings, found in 
the tantras, plus the 
oral instructions and spiritual songs composed by the mahasiddhas, such 
as this one by Saraha. Because of Chodrak Gyatso, the lineage of read­
ing transmissions and explanations of mahamudra has not disappeared, 
and now there is no danger of them being lost in the future. His Holi­
ness the Sixteenth Karmapa, Rangjung Rigpe Dorje, bestowed the read­
ing transmission of these three volumes at Rumtek Monastery, and I 
had the good fortune to receive this transmission in its entirety. 
The Life of Saraha 
Saraha was born into the Brahmin caste and became a Buddhist monas_. 
tic named Rahulabhadra. He was a very influential and highly respected 
teacher of Buddhism within the monastic tradition, enjoying the patron­
age, devotion, and faith of a king and his subjects. Then one day, while 
still engaged in teaching and practice, Saraha encountered a wisdom 
c;iakini who appeared in the form of a woman from a very low caste. At 
that time in India, social Class and caste were considered of great impor­
tance. This woman was an arrow maker, and Saraha encountered her at 
a crossroads where she was making arrows. 
When Saraha saw this woman putting the feathers on an arrow, he 
noticed that she was doing it in a way that was extremely concentrated, not 
looking to the right or left but one-pointedly working on the arrow. The 
shaft had three segments and Saraha watched her cut off the base as well 
as the tip and split the base into four, where she tied a pebble in place. At 
12 A SONG FOR THE KING 
the tip she placed the arrowhead and at the base she placed four feathers. 
Saraha addressed her, saying, ''Are you making an arrow?" In reply she 
said, "Son of noble family, the realizations of all buddhas are understood 
through skillful methods and indications, not through words and writing." 
It dawned on Saraha that she must be a 9-ak.ini and that what she said 
was a symbolic indication for him to understand. 'This is what he under­
stood. The three segments of the shaft symbolized the three kayas of the 
dharmakaya, sambhogakaya, and nirmiii].akaya. Cutting off the root 
symbolized cutting off cyclic existence at its very origin, and cutting off 
the tip of the shaft symbolized the severing of ego-clinging. 
Furthermore, he understood that placing the arrowhead onto the shaft 
symbolized wisdom and that dividing the base into four symbolized the 
four aspects of mahamudra practice: mindfulness, nonminding, the 
unborn, and beyond the intellect. 12 Placing the pebble into these four 
splits and tying it with a string symbolized unifYing method and wisdom 
(Skt. upiiya and prajfut) through the practice of calm abiding and deeper 
insight (Skt. famatha and vipafyantf). Inserting the four feathers sym­
bolized the four aspects of view, meditation, conduct, and fruition. 
Saraha understood the straightening of the arrow as following the 
straight path from the very beginning. The woman closed one eye and 
opened the other while checking the straightness of the arrow. This sym­
bolized closing the eye of dualistic mind while opening the eye of wis­
dom. At the moment when Saraha fully realized the state of mahamudra, 
he exclaimed "da." This is a play on the sound of this word, which can 
mean either "arrow" or "symbol." 13 He said, "You are not an arrow 
maker. You are a symbol maker." From that point onward Saraha 
changed his lifestyle from that of a monk to that of a siddha. 
He began to travel around with her and practice the Dharma. By 
living with her rather than being a celibate monk, Saraha greatly dis­
appointed the king and his subjects. So to convince Saraha to return to 
a more conventional monastic lifestyle, the king sent a group of his 
APPROACHING MAHAMUDRA 13 
subjects to ask Saraha to behave properly. Saraha's response to their 
request was what is known as A Song for the People, which is the first of 
the three great spiritual songs, or dohas, sung by Saraha in the vernacu­
lar of southern India. A Song for the People is the longest of the three 
songs, comprising one hundred sixty verses of instruction in mahiimudra. 
Through hearing Saraha's teaching, the people sent by the king all devel­
oped great realization and stopped asking Saraha to behave. When they 
returned to the court, the king observed that they had been unsuccess­
ful, so he decided to send a second deputation, which was made up of the 
queen and her retinue of servants. They too asked Saraha to behave, and 
his response was the second spiritual song, A Songfor the Queen, in eighty 
verses. In response to this teaching, the queen and her retinue, like the 
people before, attained authentic realization, stopped pestering Saraha, 
and returned to the court. Observing that both the people and the queen 
had been unsuccessful, the king decided to go personally and ask Saraha 
to mend his ways. Saraha's response to the king's petition was A Song for 
the King. It consists of forty stanzas, and upon hearing it, the king imme­
diately attained supreme siddhi, or full awakening. 
A Song for the King 
The literature of mahiimudra consists oflndian spiritual songs, such as 
the Three Spiritual Songs of Saraha, the Ganges Mahiimudrii ofTilopa, 
and many similar songs of realization by Tibet's great masters, such as 
Marpa and Milarepa. There are also Tibetan commentaries on 
mahamudra, among them The Ocean of Definitive Meaning by the 
Ninth Karmapa, Wangchuk Dorje. The commentaries and spiritual 
songs reflect the same outlook, present essentially the same material, 
and have the same meaning. But these two sources of mahamudra are 
quite different in how they present their subject. The commentaries 
give a systematic and clear presentati9n of mahiimudra instructions from 
14 A SONG FOR THE KING 
the very beginning of the path up to its end. By contrast, the spiritual 
songs are not systematic and sequential, as they are usually sung when a 
mahasiddha develops realization and spontaneously expresses that real­
ization through the bliss of the realization itself. Spiritual songs are more 
an expression of personal realization than a systematic presentation of the 
path. For example, in The Ocean of Definitive Meaning you will find a 
gradual presentation starting with how to practice tranquility meditation 
and then, upon mastering this, how to practice insight meditation, and 
so on. Usually spiritual songs do not present the path in such a sequen­
tial manner. Therefore, in studying the spiritual songs, which are both 
poetic and cryptic, we need the support of the great texts of instruction, 
even though the essential meaning of all of the instruction is still found 
in the songs themselves. The one I am using is The Middle-Length Com­
mentary on ~ Song for the King" by Karma Trinlepa, 14 who was the 
teacher of the Eighth Gyalwang Karmapa, Mikyo Dorje. Karma Trinlepa 
wrote commentaries on all three of Saraha's spiritual songs. 
In A Song for the King, mahamudra is taught in three aspects: ground, 
path, and fruition. This spiritual song answers the questions: What is the 
ground or basis of mahamudra practice? What is the path or process of this 
practice? What is the result or goal of this practice? In this song, the ground 
is how things really are. 15 From this perspective, the way that we experience 
ordinary appearances is confused. These mundane or samsaric appear­
ances refer to how things appear. But what are they really? How are things 
in their abiding or true nature? In other words, what lies behind the con­
fused appearances of phenomena? It must be this true nature, recognized 
as the very excellence of this ground, which makes the path of mahamudra 
possible. So the first subject of our text is an explanation of the founda­
tion of mahamudra-what is to be realized, or how things really are. The 
path to realizing mahamudra is path mahamudra. And finally, the culmi­
nation of that path is fruition mahamudra, the state of full realization. A 
Song for the King is structured along these lines of ground, path, and 
APPROACHING MAHAMUDRA 15 
fruition. In the beginning, it gives a brief presentation of all three aspects, 
and then they are presented extensively using numerous analogies. 
The Meaning of Mahamudra 
The Sanskrit term mahamudra was translated by m:ahasiddhas and great 
translators into Tibetan as chag gya chen po.16 Looking at the literal mean­
ing of the Tibetan translation can be useful in understanding what 
mahamudra is all about. When a symbolic etymology17 or explanation of 
chaggya chen po is given, it is said that chagrepresents great emptiness, and 
gya represents nondual wisdom. On first glance, this is somewhat cryptic, 
because there is no obvious connection between the Tibetan word chagand 
emptiness, nor between the Tibetan word gya and nondual wisdom. In 
common usage, the word chag is an honorific term for someone's hand, 
and the term gya means either "vast" as an adjective or "seal" as a noun. 
However, if we look at the word chagcarefully, the first thing we see is that 
this word is used a lot in Tibetan. For example, the word for "salutation" 
or "prostration" is chag tsal wa.18 When we speak of the Buddha's hand, we 
use the honorific word chag rather than the ordinary word lag pa. The 
honorific is usedJor anyone else whom we esteem, such as teachers, mon­
archs, and ministers. Nevertheless, the word chag has another usage. When 
it is not used as an honorific for hand, it has the connotation of"clean'' or 
"cleansing." For example, a broom is also called a chag ma/9 which liter­
ally means a cleanser. The reason chag, which has the connotation of 
cleansing, is the honorific form for hand is that whatever comes from the 
hand ofbuddhas or mahasiddhas, such as their writings and their actions, 
has the primary function of cleansing, purifying, or removing the misery 
and obscurations ofliving beings. Returning to the idea of great emptiness, 
it is now possible to see a connection between the word chagand the state 
of emptiness. All things are empty in their nature. Not recognizing this, 
we suffer and experience samsara. If this emptiness is recognized, that very 
r6 A SONG FOR THE KING 
recognition cleanses or removes. all suffering. It is emptiness and the recog­
nition of emptiness that cleanses us of suffering. In sum, the deeper expla­
nation for the word chagis "great emptiness," which purifies our suffering. 
The second syllable gya usually means either "that which is vast" or "a 
seal." The connection between the idea of a seal and the idea of vastness 
is that of an imprint. For example, a handprint not only depicts the 
hand, but it also shows the extent of the hand. So the extent or imprint 
of something shows what that thing fills or pervades. The second sylla­
ble, therefore, points out the fact that while emptiness is indeed the 
nature of all phenomena, emptiness is not a voidness: it is simultaneously 
nondual wisdom. In other words, emptiness itself has an innate aspect 
of lucidity. 20 The second syllable indicates that emptiness is an expanse 
of wisdom, or one could say, emptiness is pervaded with wisdom. Finally, 
the third word is the two syllables of chen po, which means "great." It 
points to the understanding that this expanse of wisdom, which is empti­
ness, is great in being all-pervasive. 
In this way, it is quite clear that mahamudra is concerned with med­
itation on emptiness as taught by the Buddha. But when we use the 
term emptiness, we may understand it in different ways. We may see 
emptiness as something positive or as something negative-an absence 
of experience and thought, an utter lack of qualities, or a state of absolute 
nothingness. That, however, is not what emptiness is, because it also 
contains an inherent lucidity. Since emptiness is at the same time great 
wisdom, it is the root of all that is beneficial. One could say that this 
emptiness is the potential and source of all wisdom that knows the true 
nature of phenomena. Therefore, while the nature to be realized is 
emptiness, that nature itself possesses inherent lucidity or wisdom. The 
instructions for realizing this true nature, including its inherent wis­
dom, constitute what we call mahamudra. 
The Song Begins 2 
l 
Now WE TURN to Saraha's song, which is explained in the tradi­
tional manner, beginning with the title and the homage of the 
translator. 
In the Indian language, the tide is: Doha Kosha Nama Charya Giti. 
In Tibetan, it is: Doha mdzod ces bya ba spyod pa'i glu. In English: 
From the Treasury of Spiritual Songs, A Song ofYogic Conduct. 
The title "A Song for the King" was added by the Tibetan translators fol­
lowing the narrative of how the three songs arose. The first was "A Song 
for the People," the second, "A Song for the Queen," and the third, "A 
Song for the King." The word doha can be translated as "song of attain­
ment" or "song of experience. "21 
I prostrate to Noble Maiijusri.22 
"Noble" also means "elevated," indicating that he is far above ordinary 
individuals and abides on a pure bodhisattva level. 
17 
18 A SONG FOR THE KING 
The Homage to the Deity by Saraha 
I prostrate to the one who has vanquished the power of the maras. 
This homage is the first part of the song that was actually composed by 
Saraha. "The one who has vanquished the power of the maras" can be 
understood as referring to mahamudra itself, which has the power to con­
quer or remove the maras. In colloquial language, the term mdras refers 
to external demons that try to tempt one in various ways. But according 
to the Buddhist tradition, mara in its fundamental sense refers to a fac­
tor that brings about suffering for oneself and others; in other words, it 
is anything that causes unhappiness and suffering. There are four types 
of maras. The first is called k!efa-mdra, which means the "mara of afflic­
tions." We have within us three major afflictions, or disturbing emotions: 
ignorance, attachment, and aversion. The five afflictions are these three 
plus jealousy and greed. They all create a great deal of suffering, for when 
they are present in a person, they can cause further suffering in others. 
They are the root of everything that keeps us in samsara, and therefore 
these disturbing emotions need to be conquered. It is the practice of 
mahamudra that is the best way to achieve liberation from samsara. 
We also possess the five aggregates of form, sensati.bn, perception, for­
mation, and consciousness. These constitute the second mara, the 
skandha-mdra, or the mara of the aggregates. Because they are compos­
ite, the aggregates change and fall apart, and in this shifting and disin­
tegration, they form an intrinsic part of samsara's cycle. For example, at 
the end of the twelve links of interdependent origination, which trace 
how samsara arises and ceases, it is said that from birth comes aging and 
death. From that come suffering, lamenting, and all manner of misery. 
In short, the aggregates are the proximate condition for the arising of suf­
fering. Their falling apart and changing lead directly to suffering; there­
fore, to go beyond suffering, we must transcend them. 
THE SONG BEGINS 19 
The third mara is called mrtyupati-miira, or the Lord of Death, who 
is depicted as a wrathful and terrifYing demon representing death itself, 
the end of a given life. It is also is something we need to move beyond 
in the sense of not being prey to the fear of death. If we practice medi­
tation on mahamudra and realize the nature of our mind, we will have 
control over our rebirth and will not fear death. It is mahamudra that 
finally conquers the Lord of Death. 
These three maras are also depicted iconographically. The mara of 
the afflictions is presented as a Brahmin. The mara of the aggregates is 
depicted as someone afflicted with extreme old age and infirmity. The 
mara of the Lord of Death is depicted as the terrifying demon of death, 
Yamantaka. The practice of Dharma frees us from these three maras. 
The fourth mara is what obstructs the practice of Dharma and pre­
vents us from becoming free of these first three maras. It is called deva­
putra-miira, or the mara of the child of the gods. A child of the gods 
sounds delightful, and this mara is depicted as a veiy attractive person 
wearing beautiful jewelry and clothing. It is actually all desirable 
things-what is pleasing to the eye, ear, nose, tongue, and touch. But 
their attractiveness is not the problem; it is our craving for and fixation 
on these pleasures and desirable states that prevents us from conquering 
the other three maras. 
To summarize, there are four maras to be conquered or transcended. 
In moving beyond them, we achieve liberation from samsara and the 
full manifestation of our spontaneously present wisdom. Here, in the 
author's homage, mahamudra is praised because it conquers all four 
maras and thereby brings about liberation and omniscience. 
A Brief Presentation of Ground Mahamudra 
A Song for the King is divided into the ground, path, and fruition of 
mahamudra. In the beginning, these three aspects of mahamudra are 
20 A SONG FOR THE KING 
presented very concisely; in later verses, they are presented extensively. 
This section encompasses the first brief presentation of ground, path, 
and fruition. We begin with ground mahamudra, which has three sec­
tions: abandoning attachment, developing positive qualities, and under­
standing what to take up and what to reject. 
Ultimate truth-the true nature of things, or dharmata-never 
changes. Within it, there is no change or fluctuation, and this is referred 
to as emptiness. It is for this reason the Heart Sutra states that there is 
no form, no sound, no smell, and so forth. 23 Emptiness is the nature of 
the ground itself, but we do not experience things as being empty. We 
experience objects, such as trees or people, in the way they appear to us, 
as more or less solid things. Therefore, we may doubt that all phenom­
ena are empty. If the nature of things is emptiness, then why are there 
appearances? The answer to this question is dealt with in the next sec­
tion of the song. 
In his Song of the Self-Arisen Nature, the first Jamgon Kongtriil Lodro 
Taye also gives an explanation of the ground, path, and fruition of 
mahamudra.24 He explains that ground mahamudra has to do with the 
nature of things and with how we confuse phenomena. This means there 
are two aspects to an explanation of ground mahamudra: the way things 
actually are and the way in which confusion arises. What we need to 
realize in our meditation is how things really are, the true nature of phe­
nomena. At present, we do not experience phenomena as they really are 
but know them in a confused or incorrect manner. While the nature of 
everything is emptiness, we do not experience things as empty but as var­
ious rather solid appearances. So we need to understand what these mis­
perceptions are and how they arise. 
The first three verses give the brief presentation of ground 
mahamudra. What do we mean by ground?We wish to achieve libera­
tion from suffering and the bewildered appearances of samsara, and the 
reason we can free ourselves is due to the fact that these phenomena are 
THE SONG BEGINS 21 
temporary or adventitious appearances coming from out confusion. 25 
Another way to say this is that they do not truly exist as they appear. If 
we understand this, then we understand something about the foundation 
ofliberation, which is gr:ound mahamudra. From that point of view, the 
path of mahamudra is the process of eradicating bewilderment and bewil­
dered appearances. When all bewilderment or confusion has been elim­
inated and, thereby, all the innate qualities of the ground are revealed, we 
have reached fruition mahamudra. 
How Delusive Appearances Arise 
within the Ground 
1. Just as when the wind blows 
And still water is turned into moving waves, 
So the appearing Saraha is just one, 
Yet the king creates diverse appearances. 
The first verse of the song concerns the confused way we perceive phe­
nomena, which is presented through an analogy of water and waves: 
"Just as when the wind blows and still water is turned into moving 
waves .... " There is no substantial difference between water and the 
waves that arise on its surface; the waves have no existence separate from 
the water itself. Nevertheless, with the presence of the wind, waves 
appear as distinct entities or manifestations of the water. In the same 
way, due to the presence c,>f confusion (the wind), appearances (the 
waves) arise in our experience. These projections of our bewilderment are 
nonexistent appearances; they are of themselves nothing other than the 
manifestation of our confusion. The meaning of this analogy can be 
applied to all phenomena and in particular to the mind, which is, after 
all, the principal focus of mahamudra. It is within the mind that the 
resolution of the nature of things is gained. The mind itself, however, has 
22 A SONG FOR THE KING 
no form, color, shape, or any other substantial characteristic, and yet 
thoughts continuously arise. These thoughts that appear within the 
mind have no existence apart from the mind. They partake of no nature 
other than that of the mind itself, and yet they appear as distinct objects 
or events. 
The point of this analogy of water and waves is to explain how phe­
nomena appear within the dharmadhatu (the expanse of all phenom­
ena), which is another name for the nature of the mind. From the 
perspective of mind itself, the analogy explains how thoughts arise as 
the display of mind's own nature. From the perspective of phenomena 
in general, the analogy shows how the nature of phenomena arises as the 
appearance of various things. 
The second two lines of the first verse employ a different analogy, 
related to the immediate situation in which 
Saraha is singing the song. 
In response to the presence and petition of the king, Saraha observes, 
"So the appearing Saraha is just one, yet the king creates diverse appear­
ances." This means that while Saraha remains one person, the king has 
diverse perceptions of him. When he thinks about Saraha's caste, he 
perceives Saraha as a Brahmin. Sometimes he sees him as a great 
pai;19ita, because Saraha was an eminent Buddhist scholar. Sometimes 
he sees Saraha as a monastic, because Saraha had received monastic 
ordination. Finally, since Saraha had broken caste and monastic codes 
by consorting with the arrow maker, he also sees Saraha as a degener­
ate yogi. But in fact, there is only one Saraha. It is the king's perception, 
or his projection, that sees all of these manifestations of Saraha as dis­
tinct persons. In the same way, while there are no distinctions within 
the expanse of the dharmadhatu, we nevertheless perceive a variety of 
phenomena. So through two analogies, this first verse on the ground of 
mahamudra shows that confused projections come about: while the 
·ground of appearances is emptiness, within that ground bewildered 
appearances arise. 
THE SONG BEGINS 23 
How Subject and Object Appear to Be Separate 
2. The ignorant press their eyes26 
And see one lamp as two. 
Like this, in mind's nature where seer and seen are not two, 
Alas! The mind appears as two things. 
The first verse showed the presence of our confusion, and this second 
verse specifies how this confusion comes about. Confusion, or false 
view, arises because we perceive things in a dual way that brings up the 
perceived object and the perceiving subject. We have an incorrect belief 
in the dualism that posits an object of experience and a subject that 
experiences it. Bewilderment, therefore, is not just mere bewilderment; 
it is double bewilderment because neither subject nor object ultimately 
exists. Take the example of an experience of the senses. When you see 
something, you assume that the external object exists as an object and 
that it also exists as a subjective thought, or perception, within the 
mind. We experience the mind as an experiencing mental conscious­
ness, and we experience objects as being within the mind and able to 
be experienced. However, the objects of mental consciousness are gen­
eralized abstractions, 27 resemblances of actual sense experience. They 
arise as generic images within the mind and are accompanied by lin­
guistic abstractions. 28 These are mistakenly perceived as being inher­
ently linked to the objects to which they refer. In fact, the object of 
experience has no inherent connection to the linguistic label that the 
mind applies to it. 
The falseness of believing in the existence of subject and object is 
explained in this second verse, which presents the situation of seeing 
something double, because we are rolling our eyes back or pressing on 
them. If we squeeze our eyes and look at a lamp, we will see two lamps. 
We cannot say that we do not see two lamps, because we actually do see 
24 A SONG FOR THE KING 
two lamps. At the same time, we know there are not really two lamps 
there. The dual lamps are an optical illusion created by our pressing on 
our eyes. In the same way, when we experience phenomena, even though 
there is no subject and no object, because of our ignorance (the pressure 
on our eyes), our experience is divided into two. 
Seeing two lamps instead of one is an analogy for what we do when 
we divide our mind into the one that perceives things and the apparent 
external things. In its true nature, the mind is not divisible into subject 
and object, just as there are not two lamps when the eyes are pressed. It 
is because we perceive the mind as divided into subject and object that 
we perceive incorrectly. So Saraha says, '~as!" It is a shame that we see 
things in a way they are not. 
The first verse showed that while the nature of all phenomena is 
emptiness, through our ignorance, the whole variety of phenomena arise 
just as waves arise in a body of water. With the analogy of the two lamps, 
the second verse explains how this incorrect belief arises through the 
dualistic perception of subject and object. Taken together, these first two 
stanzas describe the nature of confusion as seeing what does not exist. 
The nature of all perceived phenomena is emptiness, utter peace and 
perfection. This emptiness is also lucidity and the space for the unlim­
ited possibility of manifestation. It is the nature of the perceiving mind, 
yet we do not normally see it. Our ignorance has two aspects: We do 
not.see what actually exists (emptiness), and we see what does not really 
exist (the duality). 
This empty nature of the mind and phenomena is not, however, a 
voidness because it is pervaded by wisdom. Due to its lucidity, empti­
ness has the inherent capacity to manifest appearances. We might then 
ask, Why do we not see this nature of emptiness as it really is? The first 
two verses answer this question by demonstrating how we see what is 
not there. The third verse is concerned with how we do not see what 
is there. 
THE SONG BEGINS 25 
Primordial Wisdom Pervades the World 
3· Though many lamps are lit throughout the house, 
Those with no eyes to see remain in darkness. 
Like this, though spontaneous wisdom is all-pervasive and nearby, 
For the ignorant it is far, far away. 
The third stanza presents the analogy of a sightless person in a well­
illuminated place. If we were to light many lamps in a room that was 
dark, anyone who could see would be able to perceive things in the room. 
But if someone were sightless, the illumination of the lamps would have 
no effect and the person would continue to see nothing. This is an anal­
ogy for the way ignorance prevents us from seeing things as tJley are. 
The fundamental nature, found within each and every being, is spon­
taneously present wisdom. This wisdom is "all-pervasive and nearby." It 
is all-pervasive because it is present within every being without excep­
tion. It is nearby because it is our own nature, not distant or inaccessi­
ble to us. This wisdom, also called the sugatagarbha or buddha nature, 
is definitely within us, but we do not detect it because ignorance has 
obscured our seeing of it. And so, in thinking about our buddha nature, 
we tend to conceive of it as something very difficult to obtain and far 
away, even though it is our own nature. 
This ignorance in not recognizing our own nature is the source of all 
our problems and our suffering. To realize our own nature is the fruition 
of the path, the attainment of buddhahood. To make clear what this 
result is, it might be helpful to look at the Tibetan word for the Buddha, 
which is sang gye. The first syllable, sang, means "to cleanse or remove" 
and refers to the removal of ignorance. What is meant by the removal 
of ignorance? Imagine that you are dreaming and in your dream you 
drive somewhere, get into a bad accident, and are seriously injured. 
What do you really need to get rid of this pain and suffering? No 
26 A SONG FOR THE KING 
amount of medical treatment or vehicle repair will actually help this sit­
uation, because the whole time you are safely asleep in your bed. The 
only remedy that will actually get rid of your suffering is the recognition 
that you are just dreaming and no accident has occurred. As soon as you 
reali~e this, your suffering will disappear. This example illustrates that the 
elimination of our ignorance is simply removal, or sang. 
The second syllable, gye, means "expanded" or "blossomed." When 
ignorance is removed, appearances caused by it cease, and, consequently, 
there is no fear. There is no need to do anything, because our innate 
wisdom, which was always there, is simply and fully revealed. This rev­
elation of our innate wisdom is what gye, or blossomed, refers to. Attain­
ing the fruition of the path does not involve going somewhere we have 
never bec:;n or receiving something from someone else. Fruition is noth­
ing other than the recognition of our own true nature. If we wake from 
sleep, the dream will dissolve and we will experience the relief of being 
safe in the bed of our true nature. 
The method through which we achieve this awakening is called the 
three vehicles of Buddhist practice. We could define these three vehicles 
as the simple explanation, the more profound explanation, and the pro­
. foundest explanation. The first vehicle is the Foundational Vehicle, 
which explains how the cause of our suffering is the accumulation of 
karma, motivated by the disturbing emotions. If we wish to end our 
negative karma, we need to eliminate the disturbing emotions. Accord­
ing to the Foundational Vehicle, these begin with the false perception of 
self and other. When we believe in these, we begin to believe in a self. 
By fixating on it, all our disturbing emotions arise. 
We may, for example, develop an attachment to anything that gratifies 
the self and develop an aversion toward anything that is unpleasant or 
that threatens the sel£ This attachment leads straight into the disturb­
ing emotions of desire and aggression. Unfortunately, we cannot give 
up fixation on a self simply by thinking, "Now I will give up this 
THE SONG BEGINS 27 
fixation." The only way to give it up is to recognize the nature of the 
ground, which is the nonexistence of the self. In mahamudra, we do 
this through a technique called looking for the self We ask, What is my 
body? Where is my body? and so forth. Through questioning, we dis­
cover that this "I" that seems so solid and real, like something that 
endures from birth to death, has actually never existed. When we finally 
recognize the nonexistence of the self, our fixation on it naturally van­
ishes and thereby our suffering also ends. In sum, the principal object of 
meditation in the Foundational Vehicle is the meditation on the selfless­
ness of persons, and through it, the fruition of this vehicle is achieved. 
In the second vehicle, the Mahayana or Greater Vehicle, we first 
understand that all phenomena are empty, meditate on this fact, and 
finally realize it. This realization will bring to an end aU confused appear­
ances and the suffering of samsara they engender. In the Mahayana path, 
the ground is the emptiness of all phenomena, and an understanding of 
emptiness is developed through inferential valid cognition. Using logi­
cal arguments such as one and many and so on, 29 we determine that all 
things are merely collections of aggregates and therefore lack true exis­
tence. These logical arguments develop an intellectual understanding of 
emptiness, but they are very difficult to meditate on, and this makes the 
Mahayana a very long path. It is for this reason the sutras say that 
buddhahood can only be achieved through three innumerable eons of 
gathering the accumulations of merit and wisdom. It is the difficulty of 
refining this conceptual certainty of emptiness that makes for such a 
long path. 
The third vehicle, the Vajrayana, includes the profound path of maha­
mudra and reveals the ground in a different way. Especially in maha­
mudra meditation, the ground is not revealed through a logical analysis 
of external phenomena. In fact, whether trees, houses, and rocks are 
empty or not empty is not the main problem. The main problem and 
the cause of our suffering is our mind with its mistaken assumptions of 
28 A SONG FOR THE KING 
solidity-its misapprehensions based on what seems to be real experi­
ence. As the sutras state, "Taming one's mind is the Buddha's teaching." 
All appearances arise in our mind, and so we make two basic assumptions: 
that our mind is solid and substantially existent and that external phe­
nomena must be solid and existent as well because we experience them. 
Since it is our own mind, we can look into it directly without look­
ing at anything else. For example, we normally assume that our mind, 
like everything else, is seated somewhere in particular. We should then 
ask, Is our mind located in our head or in our heart, or somewhere 
between our head and feet? If we think our mind is located in a specific 
place, exactly where is it? When we look for a specific location of the 
mind, we cannot find it. Then we might think that even if the mind has 
no location, if it exists, surely it must have some kind of substantial 
characteristic. We should then ask, Does the mind have a shape? Is it 
round or triangular? and so on. When we look for its shape, we find 
nothing. When we look for its color, again we find nothing. In fact, 
when we look for any kind of substantial characteristics, we cannot find 
anything. 
Now when we look at mind, we are not engaged in logical analysis. 
We are not drawing inferences about the mind and determining what it 
must logically be. Looking at mind is direct observation. We can directly 
observe our own mind simply because it is our own mind. And when we 
do so, we don't find anything. You might ask, Is it that we don't find any­
thing because we didn't look hard enough or know how to look at the 
mind? Is it because the mind exists but it is so small that it can't be seen? 
Is it because the mind is perfectly transparent, like water, and we see 
through it and miss it? The answer is that we don't find the mind because 
the mind is empty. As the Buddha said, ''All things are empty." 
The three verses we looked at previously were primarily concerned 
with describing the manner in which we are confused. They illustrated 
how our confused perception sees things as existing while they actually 
THE SONG BEGINS 29 
don't exist. Second, in our confusion, we see something that actually 
exists as not existing. This first confusion is not recognizing the ground 
as actually being empty, and the second confusion is not recognizing 
that emptiness itself possesses inherent wisdom. While explaining how 
our confusion or ignorance arises, the verses also point out that the true 
nature of reality, the ground itself, is the unity of emptiness and lucidity. 
A Brief Presentation of Path Mahamudra 
A Songfor the King turns here to a brief presentation of the path. The 
path is possible because ignorance by its very nature is false or incor­
rect. In other words, it is possible for the ocean to be calmed because 
the waves (ignorance) are not intrinsic to the ocelin; the ocean is not 
necessarily made up of just waves. Since seeing two lamps comes from 
pressing on our eyes, when we stop doing it, we will no longer see two 
lamps and will see things as they are. In a similar way, we do not see 
the true nature of phenomena; nevertheless, the true nature is there 
and we simply fail to see it. 
It is possible to eliminate confused appearances and discover the direct 
experience of the true nature. If the ground were inherently defective, 
there would be nothing we could do to change it: But since the ground 
itself does not consist of confused experiences, our ignorance can be 
removed and the true nature can be realized. 
The methods employed in the tradition of the sutras and the tantras 
differ from each other. In the sutra path, one is mainly concerned with 
the true nature of all things, which is emptiness. Therefore, the focus of 
the sutra path is very vast, and we attempt to prove to ourselves that the 
nature of all phenomena without exception is emptiness. Whether we 
talk about the expanse and the emptiness of all things or the lucidity and 
wisdom of all things, they are indeed all-pervasive according to the 
sutras: emptiness is the nature of all phenomena without exception. It 
30 A SONG FOR TH~ KING 
is quite possible to prove logically to ourselves that everything is empti­
ness, but it is comparatively difficult to meditate on these logical argu­
ments using the sutra approach. In the practice of tantra, the focus is not 
as vast. Tantra is more concerned with profundity than with vastness, 
and therefore within the teachings, it is called the aspect of profundity. 
These instructions are not principally concerned with the empty nature 
of all phenomena, because it is not the emptiness of phenomena that 
poses the principal problem for us. Our problem stems from our mind. 
Everything we experience-delight or depression, regret or guilt, sad­
ness or happiness, enthusiasm, faith, or compassion-is rooted within 
our mind. We can analyze the nature of phenomena in the greatest detail, 
but it would still be very difficult to experience this emptiness directly. 
Within tantra, however, emptiness can be experienced directly through 
its principal practice of looking directly at our own mind. Whether we 
look at the mind itself or at the thoughts that arise as the mind's display, 
we can quickly and directly experience that mind is the manifestation of 
dharmata (reality itself). Why is this so? While the nature of mind is the 
same as .dharmata, it is not evident in the experience of external objects; 
it is, however, evident in the experience of our own mind. 
When the mind is scrutinized, we see that is has no shape, form, or 
color because it is empty. When we recognize this, we begin a process 
that will eventually culminate in the elimination of all our suffering. 
Even in the short term, this looking at the mind alleviates mental suf­
fering. This is why we meditate on the mind. 
We might ask, If we are concerned with the mind alone, why do we 
need to think about the view or the ground? We need the view because 
we must understand why we meditate. We do not meditate simply 
because it feels good or because we want to have great experiences. 
Nor do we meditate just because we want to feel peaceful and tranquil. 
We meditate because through meditation, it is possible to utterly elim­
inate from the mind all of our disturbing emotions. The purpose of 
THE SONG BEGINS 31 
meditation is to achieve complete elimination of the mind's afflictions. 
We meditate because our mind is innately capable of being utterly at 
peace, completely free of disturbing emotions, and also perfectly 
insightful and discerning. 
We meditate to cleanse our mind. We do suffer from ignorance, but 
this confusion is temporary, since it is secondary to the mind's nature 
and not an intrinsic part of it. If we purify the mind through the prac,­
tice of meditation, this ignorance can be removed. Further, since this 
ignorance is not fundamental to it, the mind does not disappear when 
the ignorance is removed. Our experience does not stop, nor is it super­
seded by a state of annihilation or nothingness. The qualities of the 
Buddha include the omniscient wisdom of the nature of phenomena 
and the wisdom of the variety of phenomena. Tl:ie seed of this wisdom 
is innate to our mind, and we meditate in order to achieve it. 
The path in general is a process that gradually transcends the confused 
appearances of samsara and culminates in their elimination. This is 
referred to as the fruition of the path. The path is usually presented as 
successive stages, like traveling from one place to another. Here, however, 
the song points out that the path does not truly consist of going from 
one state to another; it is more like returning to the original nature that 
we have failed to realize. By relinquishing bewilderment and confusion, 
we discover that nature. Since they are not intrinsic to the true nature 
of mind, the nature itself does not change: there is no real moving from 
one place, or one state, to another. We merely return to what was always 
there and see it without confusion or veils of ignorance. 
The path has two aspects. The Third Karmapa, Rangjung Dorje, 
wrote in his Aspiration Prayer of Mahamudra: "The meaning of the 
ground is the two truths beyond the extremes of permanence and anni­
hilation." This means that we should recognize that the ground is 
beyond two extremes: the permanence of real existence and the annihi­
lation of absolute nonexistence. The Third Karmapa continues: "The 
32 A SONG FOR THE KING 
supreme path is the unity of the two accumulations, beyond the 
extremes of superimposition or denial." Superimposition and denial are 
ways of incorrectly understanding the nature of phenomena, that is, to 
have an incorrect perception of the ground. When we believe that some­
thing that does not actually exist does exist, that is the error of exagger­
ation. When we believe that something that actually does exist does not 
exist, that is the error of denial. The path, therefore, is the process of 
coming to see the ground as it is, free of these two extremes. 
Seeing the ground as it actually is has two aspects called the two accu­
mulations: the conceptual accumulation of merit and the nonconceptual 
accumulation of wisdom. The accumulation of wisdom is the process of 
developing a correct view that understands the ground and then con­
tinuing to meditate upon it. Of the two accumulations, this noncon­
ceptual accumulation of wisdom is central and can only occur under 
the right conditions. The accumulation of merit, which involves con­
cepts, is necessary to create the right conditions for the accumulation of 
wisdom, which transcends concepts. This gathering of merit can be done 
physically, verbally, or mentally, and it will facilitate and enhance our 
accumulation of wisdom. The path, therefore, consists of the integration 
of these two aspects. 
This third verse discussed the nature of the path. The next verse in this 
brief presentation of the path uses three analogies to show why we can 
achieve realization by following the path. 
The Wisdom Realizing Emptiness 
Purifies Ignorance 
4· Though diverse, rivers are one in the ocean. 
Though myriad, lies are overcome by a single truth. 
Though darkness is manifold, 
The rising of a single sun clears it away. 
THE SONG BEGINS 33 
The first of the three analogies refers to rivers: "Though diverse, rivers 
are one in the ocean'' means that all rivers eventually flow into the ocean. 
This analogy points to the fact that we undergo a wide variety of expe­
riences produced by ignorance. Yet these myriad states of happiness and 
sadness, in their almost infinite variations, all have the same fundamen­
tal nature. Therefore, through the pursuit of one path, any confusion, no 
matter how vast or various, can be resolved. 
The second analogy concerns lies and the truth: "Though myriad, 
lies are overcome by a single truth." This illustrates that no matter how 
many lies are told about something, once the truth is revealed, all those 
lies, even hundreds of them, are disproved and revealed as false. In one 
sense this example is an analogy, and in another sense it is a statement 
about the nature of confusion and realization: Whatever our ignorance 
and whatever our many varieties of confused appearances may be, if the 
true nature of phenomena is realized, then all our confusion can be 
removed, because ultimately it is false. In other words, realization of 
reality's truth is overcomes all possible misperceptions about the nature 
of reality. 
From the perspective of the vast surra path, this means that through 
meditation on dharmata, confused and incorrect appearances can be 
effaced. From the perspective of the profound tantra, this means that 
through meditation on the nature of the mind, ignorance can be grad­
ually eradicated. What is especially significant here is that the path has 
an effect: it actually brings us to fruition by eliminating ignorance. 
The third analogy is of the sun and darkness: "Though darkness is 
manifold, the rising of a single sun clears it away." No matter how dark 
a place is, no matter how vast an area darkness covers, and no matter 
how long it has been dark, once the sun shines upon it, the darkness is 
eliminated in an instant. This illustrates the relationship between what 
is true (the sun) and what is false (the darkness). No matter how much 
confusion we experience, how long we have been experiencing it, or 
34 A SONG FOR THE KING 
whether it manifests as a state of happiness or a state of misery, if we cul­
tivate the path of meditation on the nature of phenomena, this igno­
rance in all of its variety, intensity, and duration can be removed and the 
true nature can be realized. 
In this fourth verse, Saraha states that based on his realization and 
experience, there is no doubt that the path of mahamudra can remove 
ignorance. He asserts this to assure his disciples that it is possible, thereby 
encouraging them to pursue the path. To follow any path and move 
from .one place to another, we need a map, which is based on people hav­
ing actually traveled on that path. For example, if we want to go from 
one city to another, we have to make sure that we know how to get there 
so we will not take the wrong road and get lost. To prevent this, we usu­
ally obtain a set of directions or a map. Looking at it, we learn what 
local roads we need to take in order to get to the right highway. In 
mahamudra, we use a map that was produced by generation after gen­
eration of mahasiddhas, all of whom began exactly like us, in a state of 
ordinary bewilderment. They pursued this path and achieved its result, 
the total elimination of ignorance and the full realization of mind's true 
nature. Their description of the path allows us not to get lost while trav­
eling upon it. 
Some may wonder if actual and accurate instructions for traversing 
the path still exist. The answer is that they do, and they have not been 
lost or diluted over time. In fact, each generation of mahasiddhas has 
added further clarifications to the layout. This is the map that shows us 
how to find the path in the beginning, how to continue along the path 
once we have gained some degree of experience, and, finally, what kind 
of realization we can expect. We can find this spiritual map for the entire 
path in the books of instruction on the practice of mahamudra. 
THE SONG BEGINS 35 
Developing Faith and Diligence 
Faith and interest are the ground providing a basis for our entrance into 
Dharma. The protector Maitreya stated in the Ornament of Clear Real­
ization30 that faith is like the foundation. This means that if you want 
to grow anything, such as trees, grains, or flowers, you need the earth. 
In the same way, faith is like the ground from which all of the qualities 
of the path arise. From the very beginning, faith and interest in Dharma 
are very Important. 
Those who have entered the path of Dharma have naturally developed 
these qualities. First, they understood enough about the Dharma to have 
an interest in it. Then, through great exertion and austerity they pursued 
its practice and study. Nevertheless, they must continue to look carefully 
at the quality of their faith and interest. Interest can be stable or it can 
be temporary and ephemeral. Even a transitory interest in Dharma is 
good. However, it is produced by conditions and when those conditions 
change, interest can vanish. So we need to stabilize our interest and faith, 
and this is achieved by knowing the reasons for having faith in the 
Dharma in the first place. 
A series of contemplations called the four thoughts that turn the mind 
are instrumental in developing interest and faith in the Dharma. By 
studying and reflecting on these, we come to understand the reasons for 
and the benefits of practicing Dharma and, by contrast, the defects of 
not practicing. Thinking about these four thoughts most carefully is 
especially important for beginners. In particular, the Buddha said that 
the contemplation of impermanence, which is the second of the four 
thoughts, is like the footprint of an elephant. An elephant's footprint was 
considered the best footprint, because not only is it very large, but it 
has a nice round, uniform shape, not elongated and strange like a human 
footprint. In the same way, the contemplation of impermanence is the 
best, as it brings about a more spacious and uniform state of mind. In 
36 A SONG FOR THE KING 
~e beginning, it is impermanence that inspires our faith and interest in 
Dharma. Afterward, it is impermanence that inspires and encourages 
diligence in practice. For example, people often come to me and say, 
"I'm really interested in Dharma, but I cannot make myself practice." 
Or, "I used to practice a lot, but now I just cannot make myself do it." 
Or, "I really want to practice, but somehow I cannot get it together. I 
cannot find the time or the circumstances." In all these cases, the rem­
edy fcir this inability to generate the diligence to practice is contempla­
tion of impermanence. When we find that our diligence is flagging, we 
should bring impermanence to mind and our practice will increase. 
When we find that we are losing faith, considering impermanence will 
help it return. So impermanence is important at the beginning and 
throughout the path as the means of overcoming the loss of faith and 
diligence. 
By reflecting on these four thoughts that turn the mind, we initially 
develop a stable faith; continuing on the path, we are able to further 
stabilize, strengthen, and reinforce our faith as we practice. In this way, 
the faith we first generate and then develop is not a casual or uninformed 
faith. It is faith based upon the correct information about why we should 
practice the Dharma, so it is much stronger and more stable. This is the 
reason for continuing to contemplate the four thoughts throughout the 
length of our path. 
The Two Paths 
The actual path can be followed in two ways: through the path of 
method and through the path of liberation. In the Kagyii tradition, the 
path ofliberation is mahamudra practice, and the path of method is the 
six yogas ofNaropa. To pursue the path of method, we begin by accu­
mulating merit and wisdom and then purifying our obscurations. This 
is done through the preliminary practices, which consist of going for 
THE SONG BEGINS 37 
The Four Thoughts That Turn the Mind 
I. THE PRECIOUS HUMAN LIFE 
First, contemplate the preciousness of a life free and 
well-favored . 
Difficult to gain, it is easy to lose; now I must make it 
meaningful. 
If. IMPERMANENCE 
Second, the environment and the living beings therein are 
impermanent; 
In particular; the life of beings is like a bubble. 
The time of death is uncertain; when dead, this body will be 
a corpse. 
At that time only Dharma will help, so I must practice with 
diligence. 
Ill. KARMA AS CAUSE AND EFFECT 
Third, when death comes, I will be helpless. 
Because I create karma, I must abandon negative actions 
And always devote myself to virtuous ones. 
Thinking this, every day I will examine my mind stream. 
IV. THE DEFECTS OF SAMSARA 
Fourth, the places, friends, comforts, and wealth of samsara 
Are the constant torment of the three sufferings. 
Just like a feast before the executioner leads one into death. 
Cutting desire and attachment. I must endeavor to attain 
enlightenment. 
38 A SONG FOR A KING 
refuge and generating bodhicitta while doing prostrations, then medi­
tating on Vajrasattva, making mandala offerings, and practicing guru 
yoga. After completing guru yoga and receiving the blessing of our 
teacher and ·lineage, we engage in the practice of a meditational deity 
('fib. yidam). Through the generation and completion stages of this prac­
tice, we achieve realization. That is the path of means or method. 
The path ofliberation is the practice of mahamudra. It begins with the 
stabilization of our wavering mind through the practice of tranquility 
meditation. Then through insight meditation, which looks into the 
nature of mind, mahamudra is accomplished. To facilitate and enhance 
the practices of tranquility and insight, we must still engage in gathering 
the two accumulations even while pursuing the path of liberation. The 
accumulations serve to greatly enhance the practices of tranquility and 
insight. When our practice of tranquility is unstable, it can be grounded 
through these practices. When we lack insight, it can be generated by 
these practices. Therefore, the path in either format conforms to what 
was said by the Third Karmapa, Rangjung Dorje, in his Aspiration Prayer 
of Mahiimudrii: "The supreme path is that of the two accumulations, 
beyond the extremes of exaggeration and denial." The principal path is 
facilitated through gathering the accumulation of merit.-Though the 
path of means and the path ofliberation may appear distinct, the nature 
of the paths and what is to be realized by them is the same. 
Mahamudra as a Modern Buddhist Practice 
Since the paths of method and liberation have the same nature and lead 
to the same result, it is possible to practice them in isolation or to com­
bine them. These days, especially in the West, the path ofliberation will 
be of the greatest benefit, because of the eighty-four mahasiddhas, or 
great masters, who arose during a time in the history of India when the 
Dharma and the Vajrayana flourished simultaneously. What they had in 
THE SONG BEGINS 39 
common was that all of them practiced mahamudra and through it, all 
of them attained realization. Beyond that, their lifestyle~ varied tremen­
dously. Some of them were in very high social positions like the power­
ful and wealthy King Indrabhuti. While fulfilling his responsibilities as 
a king and enjoying the luxury of his court life, he was able to practice 
mahamudra meditation and achieve complete awakening. We can infer 
from this example that mahamudra practice works in a situation of vast 
activity, tremendous responsibility, and great luxury. 
Other mahasiddhas were important scholars, of whom the best­
known was Nagarjuna, one of the greatest scholars in the history of 
Buddhism. Throughout his life, he composed an impressive number of 
treatises, which clarified for the first time various aspects of the Buddha's 
teachings. In his compositions Nagarjuna refuted mistaken positions so 
skillfully that even those he refuted accepted his arguments. Due to his 
effectiveness, the Buddha's teachings spread far and wide. Nagarjuna's 
impact was so far-reaching that he revolutionized Buddhist scholarship. 
Even non-Buddhist traditions in India were radically changed by his 
writing and his methods of reasoning. This tremendous influence was 
due to the precision of his reasoning, which was unprecedented. Though 
Nagarjuna was busy teaching, composing, or debating, he still managed 
to achieve supreme siddhi in his lifetime through the practice of 
mahamudra. It is therefore evident that mahamudra can be practiced 
effectively in a busy life of scholarship. Other mahasiddhas had common 
occupations, some of them quite lowly; for example, the great siddha 
Tilopa ground sesame seeds. Those with little time or wealth were also 
able to practice mahamudra and achieve full awakening. 
If we look at our present situation, we can see that some practition­
ers are in high social positions with great responsibilities and living in 
great luxury; others have ordinary occupations, which keep them quite 
busy; and still others are academics, scholars, and so forth. The poirit of 
the example of the mahasiddhas is that all of these types of people with 
40 A SONG FOR THE KING 
their many different lifestyles can practice mahamudra effectively and 
can definitely achieve enlightenment. Furthermore, if the practice of 
mahamudra is combined with the practice of the preliminaries as a foun­
dation, it will go very well. 
A Brief Presentation of Fruition Mahamudra 
AN EXAMPLE AND ITS MEANING 
5· Though cloud banks take up water from the ocean 
And fill the earth again with descending rains, 
The ocean does not decrease; filling the whole sky, it remains full: 
There is no increase or decrease. 
6. The Victorious Ones are filled with perfect qualities, 
Which all have the very same nature-spontaneous presence. 
From the natural display of the great sphere, living beings take 
birth and therein cease. 
In relation to this, there is no thing and no nonthing.31 
The fifth and the sixth verses give a brief presentation of mahamudra's 
fruition. The fifth verse contains an analogy for the state of fruition and 
the sixth verse presents its meaning. Using the analogy of the ocean, 
Saraha illustrates that the fruition of mahamudra is a state beyond 
increase and decrease. Even though water from the ocean is taken up by 
clouds through evaporation and then sent down as rain, the ocean is 
never depleted of water; nor is the water of the ocean increased through 
rainfall, because the amount of water involved in the whole system 
remains constant. In the same way, through the pursuit of the path, we 
reach the goal of enlightenment and develop full realization of the nature 
of all phenomena or, one could say, we realize spontaneously present, 
coemergent wisdom. What we are realizing are the qualities of the 
THE SONG BEGINS 41 
ground, the unchanging basic nature, and so the qualities of the fruition, 
like the ocean, are unchanging. In other words, at fruition these quali­
ties do not increase or decrease. 
It is said in the Uttaratantra,32 "There is nothing to be removed from 
this and there is nothing that needs to be added to this." When some­
thing perfect is perfectly seen, you will be perfectly liberated. There is no 
defect in the nature of your mind .that needs to be removed. There are 
no qualities outside of it that need to be introduced into it. If you can 
look at this nature properly to see the nature as it is and you see this com­
pletely, then simply through this act, you will be completely liberated. 
This is the point of verse 6. 
In summary , verses 1 to 3 explain the ground; verse 4 explains the 
path; and verses 5 and 6 explain the fruition of mahamudra. 
Questions 
Question: Rinpoche, you made some statements regarding generalized 
and linguistic abstractions and I was wondering if you could go over 
that again. 
Rinpoche: I mentioned these as illustrations of how bewildered appear­
ances occur within the mind. More specifically, I was talking about how 
we experience outside objects and perceive our thinking mind, without 
the mind and its object actually existing as two separate things. When 
an object experienced by one of the senses appears in our mind, what 
appears is a generalized image or likeness of that thing. For example, if 
we imagine our home right now, we will be able to create a fairly clear 
and detailed picture of the various rooms, our furniture, and so forth. 
In spite of the vividness of this experience and its great detail, none. of 
these things are actually physically present within our mind. What is 
42 A SONG FOR THE KING 
present is an image of it, a mere appearance. In the context of valid 
cognition, this is called a generalized or generic image abstracted from 
our experience. 
I also mentioned that sometimes this image in our mind could be a 
generalized sound or a linguistic abstraction. For example, when the 
name of a person or the name of an object with which we are familiar 
comes to mind, that person or thing is not actually present, and yet the 
name of the person or thing brings up associations with it. Furthermore, 
when we think of the name, we have not actually heard the sound of the 
name. A linguistic abstraction is like an image of a sound. We did not 
actually hear that sound because someone did not actually say that name, 
and yet the image of that sound arose in our mind and brought with it 
all of the associations with the 'object or person we habitually refer to by 
using that word. These are all examples of how something can arise 
vividly in the mind-a clear image or a recollected sound, a name or a 
word-and yet it is empty of physical existence and is therefore an empty 
manifestation. 
Question: Is this creation of generalized images true for the visualization 
of meditational deities? 
Rinpoche: In the practice of the generation stage, the visualization of 
deities does involve the use of generalized images. However, the context 
of visualizing deities is different from our discussion here. The intro­
duction of generalized images points to the fact that while we seem to 
see trees and rocks outside, what we imagine is not there. While we 
seem to hear in our mind the sound of a word or name, it is not there. 
By contrast, in the practice of the generation stage of the deity, we are 
mainly concerned with relative truth and not ultimate truth. We are 
mainly concerned with the aspect of lucidity and not the aspect of 
emptiness. In our discussion of the .term generalized image, we are look­
ing into emptiness. 
THE SONG BEGINS 43 
Question: Rinpoche, it is my understanding that we are to come to 
mahamudra practice without concepts, without fabrication. Yet from 
hearing these wonderful Dharma teachings, I now have many concepts. 
I am expecting to have a certain experience in mahamudra that has been 
described as spacious, clear, and lucid. Now I feel that these concepts are 
a hindrance and a support. What to do with them? And ifl do have an 
experience in doing mahamudra practice, how do I know if it is really a 
fabrication of my mind? 
Rinpoche: The primary intent of mahamudra instruction is to teach us 
to be free of any attempt to-control or alter the mind's nature. The 
instructions are that in meditation, we should be free of any wish to cre­
ate or maintain any particular mental state. In the mahamudra tradition, 
the type of meditation in which we pursue the experience of trying to 
achieve a particular state of mind is known as rainbow meditation: we 
are pursuing something beautiful for the experience. The problem with 
this is that we are trying to bring about a certain positive experience. This 
involves conceptual contrivance and altering the mind-the very things 
that prevent us from experiencing mind's nature, which is not contrived 
and cannot be altered or changed. Therefore, instead of experiencing 
mind's nature, we experience whatever it is that we have created. 
Mahamudra meditation is a direct experience of the mind as it is and 
not an attempt to alter or create it. The mind's nature does not have to 
be changed, and, actually, the true nature cannot be created or recreated. 
Nevertheless, this instruction does not mean that we should allow our­
selves to be distracted by thoughts or disturbing emotions. The freedom 
from alteration does not mean allowing ourselves to be drawn away; it 
means freedom from the conceptually directed meditation of attempt­
ing to achieve a certain state. For example, while meditating we may 
think, "I must experience this emptiness. The mind is brilliant lucidity 
and I must perceive this lucidity." The primary intent of the instruction 
is to be free from this discursiveness. 
44 A SONG FOR THE KING 
With regard to your second question, it is difficult to ascertain imme­
diately the nature of an experience in meditation. But over time, based 
on what happens to the experience, you will be able to tell whether it is 
an authentic experience of mind's nature or some kind of contrived expe­
rience. If the experience is of something contrived, it will gradually dis­
solve. That is why it is said, "Experience vanishes like the mist." So over 
time, if the experience does not develop but diminishes, that indicates 
that it was a temporary, or contrived, experience. However, if it gradu­
ally develops toward realization, this indicates that it was authentic. You 
will have very few questions about this true experience, because the wis­
dom of the experience itself will obviate theorizing questions about it. 
Ground Mahamudra 3 
THE FIRST SIX VERSES of Saraha's song presented an overview of the 
ground, path, and fruition. Saraha now returns to the same sub­
jects, but in much greater detail. I apologize for the repetitious nature of 
traditional Buddhist texts. The reason for this is that the initial presenta­
tion is a brief summary that serves as an introduction to the whole work. 
Generally , in the context of the ground, path, and fruition, the under­
standing of the ground is presented in terms of the three aspects of prac­
tice: view, meditation, and conduct. The view is the general outlook of 
the ground. The Third Karmapa, Rangjung Dorje, wrote: "Confidence 
in the view is the eradication of superimposition and denial with regard 
'tO the ground." Previously, we saw that the ground is explained as the 
way things really are and that not seeing this leads to ignorance . Through 
the realization of mind's nature, a special certainty is generated within; 
when we comprehend this, it becomes the view. The view is unmistaken 
because it is not caught by the fault of superimposition, which is the 
belief that something exists when it actually does not. Further, the view 
is not mistaken because it is not caught by the fault of denial, the belief 
that something that actually does exist does not. 
The detailed presentation of the ground makes up fourteen stanzas .. 
The first four of these stanzas use incongruent analogies '3 to show that 
craving or fixation must be given up. Generally , the type of craving that 
45 
46 A SONG FOR THE KING 
is referred to in these verses is an attachment that can arise through the 
practice of meditation. This happens when we have an experience and 
then begin to desire its repetition and continuation. The reason such 
craving must be relinquished is that the purpose of meditation is to real­
ize the nature of our mind. Attachment to any form of temporary or 
conditioned experience obstructs this realization, because what we are 
attempting to realize is not temporary or conditioned experiences but 
what transcends them. 
Attachments to Be Abandoned in Meditation 
ATTACHMENT TO CoNDITIONED Buss 
7· Giving up genuine bliss, you take another path 
And place your hopes in conditioned bliss. 
Taking nectar in their mouth, bees come close, 
But not drinking, they are far from enjoyment. 
There are four verses concerned with the problem of attachment to a 
temporary experience in meditation. The analogy used in the first of 
these stanzas is the analogy of bees taking nectar from flowers on the 
mountainsides and then not being able to consume it themselves. When 
bees take nectar from the flowers they find, they put it into their mouths, 
so they are very close to enjoying it. But they never actually do so. They 
give it to others, and therefore, from their point of view, their collection 
of the nectar is pointless. Unlike the bees, when practicing meditation, 
we must drink the ultimate nectar: we must realize the mind's nature. If 
we become attached to conditioned bliss, which is a temporary experi­
ence of intense well-being, then this attachment to a temporary state 
will prevent us from actually experiencing the true result of meditation 
practice. In this sense, our meditation becomes like bees collecting honey 
without consuming it. 
GROUND MAHAMUDRA 47 
This situation of being bound by attachment to experience can happen 
through the pursuit of meditation in general or, in particular, through 
practicing the techniques found on the path of method. Here, through 
working with the sub de channels and subtle winds of our body, we can 
generate experiences of bliss, extraordinary clarity, and nonthought. 
These experiences arise on the path of method, but they are not the goal 
of the path. The purpose of these experiences is merely to serve as meth­
ods leading to the recognition of mind's nature. The experiences them­
selves are not the point of meditation. Therefore, becoming attached to 
them prevents us from going toward our true goal. 
In sum, whenever experiences of bliss, clarity, and nonconceptuality 
arise in meditation, it is important not to become· attached to them. 
The situation is fundamentally the same whether the experiences arise 
through the path of method or through the practice of tranquility and 
insight. As long as we become attached to any meditation experience, we 
are like a bee that collects honey but never gets to consume it. The con­
trary is also true: if we are not attached to the experiences in meditation, 
we are like a bee that actually gets to consume the honey. 
ATTACHMENT TO WHAT Is TO BE TAKEN OR GIVEN UP 
8. Having gone astray, the animals do not create suffering; 
On the basis of this human life, experts create suffering. 
On one hand, practitioners come to drink the nectar of space; 
On the other, experts remain very attached to objects. 
The previous verse presented an analogy for relinquishing attachment to 
experiences in meditation. Verse 8 concerns discarding attachment to what 
is to be accepted and what is to be rejected. The analogy used here is of a 
clever person and a foolish person. However, in this case, the foolish per­
son is the positive example and the clever person is the negative one. 
48 A SONG FOR THE KING 
The first two lines state: "Having gone astray, the animals do not cre­
ate suffering; on the basis of this human life, experts create suffering." 
Normally we would think of animals as stupid and experts, human beings, 
as smart. But animals do not accumulate very much negative karma. Even 
predators such as lions and tigers kill to eat, and therefore, they do not 
really accumulate much negative karma because their motivation is not 
malicious. Furthermore, during their whole lives they do not kill as many 
beings as an expert can kill in one instant with a bomb. Often, human 
intelligence is used nor for the good but as a cause of great tragedies and 
rhe accumulation of negative karma. Here, the analogy shows that under 
certain circumstances, it is better to be dumb than to be smart. 
The second two lines of this verse explain what the analogy refers to. 
"On one hand, practitioners come to drink the nectar of space; on the 
other, experts remain very attached to objects." "Experts" here refers to 
those who are very learned in Dharma and therefore very skilled at rig­
orous logical analysis of phenomena. Such persons can be referred to as 
"Dharma professionals," and they correspond to the experts in the sec­
ond line. The dumb animals in the first line are comparable to yogis or 
practitioners, who appear somewhat dumb or unsophisticated when 
compared to these clever individuals. 
The experts use their intellect to analyze the nature of phenomena 
meticulously. The criticism here is not of the analysis itself; it is just that 
they never get to the point of applying what they discover in analysis to 
actual meditation practice. If the fruition that comes from logically ana­
lyzing phenomena is not used in meditation practice to develop an 
authentic experience of the mind's nature, then the heaps of knowledge 
and information accumulated are useless. On the other hand, a yogi 
rests his or her mind in meditation and thereby drinks the nectar of 
space. "Drinking the nectar of space" means coming to realize the nature 
of the mind, or dharmata. Yogis, who are comparatively dumb, achieve 
the ultimate result. The point here is simply that meditation is more 
GROUND MAHAMUDRA 49 
important than clever analysis. It is not saying that the logical analysis 
of phenomena is bad; on the contrary, it is good. But if it is never applied 
to practical experience, it is wasted. 
It is for this reason that in Vajrayana practice, the view is developed 
by means of direct valid cognition and not inferential valid cognition. 
These two types of valid cognition are two possible ways that the view 
can be generated, and therefore they are two possible foundations of the 
path. Using inferential valid cognition to ascertain the view involves 
strict logical analysis. Nagarjuna carefully described this process in order 
to reveal emptiness as the true nature of all phenomena. In his system, 
one examines phenomena, including apparently solid objects, and proves 
through logical reasoning that they are empty. 
Inferential valid cognition actually has two aspects: One is the analy­
sis of the existence of self, and the other is the analysis of the existence 
of external phenomena. In the first case, what we are analyzing is that 
which we normally think of as "I" or "myself." We examine the charac­
teristics of this imputed self and look to see if there is anything that pos­
sesses these characteristics. We also examine to see (r) if the self is located 
in or is identical to the body or (2) if the self is located in or is identical 
to the mind. With careful analysis, we discover that none of these are the 
case, because the self or "I" does not exist. 
Through logical analysis, we can show that all phenomena can be 
broken down ever further into components.34 Therefore, even the coars­
est and most apparently solid phenomena are merely aggregates and thus 
have no true existence. This type of analysis generates a great conceptual 
certainty that emptiness is indeed the true nature of phenomena. 
In their spiritual songs, Kagyti masters of the past have said that those 
who are learned in reasoning and scripture have lost the meaning of 
nonduality. What this means is that through the rigorous study of the 
scriptures and their commentaries and through the application of logi­
cal reasoning, we can develop a very refined conceptual understanding 
50 A SONG FOR THE KING 
of the nature of phenomena. But having mastered this, we will not see the 
true nan~re itself, because it cannot be an object of conceptual under­
standing. The true nature cannot be realized through concepts . 
.For example, when logically examining mind's true nature, we deter­
mine that existence and nonexistence are mutually exclusive. Either 
something exists or it does not. But when we hold these two conditions 
as mutually exclusive, we are prevented from directly realizing that the 
true naq.ue of phenomena is the unity of appearance and emptiness. 
The reason this unity cannot be apprehended intellectually was stated by 
Santideva in A Guide to the Bodhisattva's Wtty of Life: "Ultimate truth is 
not the object of the intellect because the intellect itself is relative truth." 
The intellect can only think, and ultimate truth cannot be grasped by 
thought. O,nly things that can be conceptualized are within the realm of 
relative truth. This means that all the clever thinking and analysis we do 
is not sufficient to lead us to the recognition of ultimate truth, even 
though ultimate truth is the object of the intellectual examination. 
Santideva continues: "Whereas we [practitioners] with the key of oral 
instructions put our finger right on it and take it as the path." It is the 
oral instructions 35 and not Madhyamaka analysis that allows us to iden­
tify the true nature as surely as if we could touch it with our fingertip. 
The second way to develop the view, which is the one used most often 
in the Vajrayana, is taking direct valid cognition as the path. In this 
approach, we do not analyze external phenomena or external objects; 
rather, we look directly at our mind. Furthermore, not only is the object 
of consideration different, but the manner of examining is different as 
well. When looking at, or for, the mind, we do not look for it with rea­
soning. We do not attempt to prove through logical analysis that the 
mind must be one thing or many things, and so on. We just look at it 
directly to observe its characteristics. 
In order to understand how these approaches are actually implemented 
by Vajrayana practitioners, we need to think of Dharma practice in three 
GROUND MAHAMUDRA 51 
broad phases: hearing (or studying), contemplating (or thinking about), 
and meditating. When engaged in the first two stages of training-hear­
ing and contemplating-we do not employ direct valid cognition but 
turn to inferential valid cognition, which is the rigorous application of 
logical analysis. This produces a decisive certainty about the nature of 
phenomena. Through this process, we become absolutely certain about 
what ultimate truth is like. 
But when we begin to practice meditation, we do not employ infer­
ential valid cognition; we use direct valid cognition. Inference is very 
effective in producing a decisive conceptual certainty, but it is very hard 
to apply this certainty to direct experience. It takes an extremely long 
time to refine it and develop actual wisdom. For this reason, the Buddha 
said, "It takes three periods of innumerable eons of gathering the accu­
mulations to achieve buddhahood." Therefore, we do not use inference 
in the practice of meditation, but direct valid cognition. 
In Vajrayana, the view is established through what is called the view 
of direct experience, which refers to direct valid cognition. Through 
direct observation of the mind, we know how the mind is without hav­
ing to infer or deduce it. 
The Vajrayana path leads to the state of great unity, the state ofVajra­
dhara, in one lifetime and in one body. This leads to a question: If the 
Buddha said that it takes three periods of innumerable eons to achieve 
buddhahood, then the statement that one can achieve the same state in 
one lifetime and one body must be untrue. Or conversely, if it is true that 
one can achieve buddhahood in one lifetime and one body, then the 
Buddha's statement that it takes three periods of innumerable eons to 
achieve buddhahood must be untrue. In fact, both statements are true. 
It takes three periods of innumerable eons to achieve buddhahood if 
one takes a path based solely on inferential valid cognition. It takes so 
long and involves such gathering of the accumulations because there is 
great difficulty in implementing inferential valid cognition in practical 
52 A SONG FOR THE KING 
experience. The statement that we can achieve buddhahood in just one 
lifetime with one body is found in the context of the uncommon oral 
instructions. These are all based on taking direct experience and direct 
valid cognition as the basis of the path. In the practice of mahamudra, 
the view is established through direct valid cognition; in the practices of 
the Vajrayana, direct valid cognition is the tradition of the siddhas. I 
think this path is an excellent one for us to follow. 
In this eighth verse a distinction is made between practitioners who 
come to drink the nectar of space and experts who remain attached to 
objects. The point being made here is very significant. The cultivation 
of the wisdom arising through hearing and contemplation is of great 
importance. But if we become attached to it and consider it as an end 
in itself, it becomes meaningless and useless, because the only function 
of this wisdom is to prepare us for the direct experience in meditation. 
By themselves, the wisdoms of hearing and contemplation cannot lead 
to buddhahood. We do need to cultivate these, but after having done so, 
we must actually engage in the practice of meditation. In sum, Saraha 
is saying not to waste the opportunity of this life in interminable analy­
sis, but to practice meditation so that we can drink the nectar of space. 
ATTACHMENT TO WHAT Is CONTAMINATED 
9· Bugs on excrement are attached to its smell 
And think the pure fragrance of sandalwood foul. 
Likewise, attached to dense ignorance, the source of samsara, 
Individuals toss away the transcendence of suffering. 
The seventh stanza was an instruction to relinquish attachment to med­
itation experiences and to use meditation to recognize the mind's 
nature. The eighth verse was an instruction to relinquish attachment to 
GROUND MAHAMUDRA 53 
the wisdom arising from hearing and contemplation and to go further 
into the actual practice of meditation. 
The ninth verse contains the instruction to give up attachment to 
what is defiled. As long as we have this attachment, we will not aspire 
toward anything beyond it. The verse states: "Bugs on excrement are 
attached to its smell and think the pure fragrance of sandalwood foul." 
Dung beetles, who live in the midst of excrement, think that this smell 
is really good; if they were to smell something like sandalwood, which 
we would normally regard as pleasant, they would be disgusted by it. In 
the same way, those who are attached to dense ignorance, including the 
attachment to pleasures of this-life, cast away the possibility of tran­
scending suffering, and in this sense, they are like bugs. 
Living in this world, we have no choice but to deal with the com­
monplace. The instruction here is not that we should try to avoid it but 
that we should not limit ourselves to the mundane. Do not be so con­
cerned with the everyday world that you exclude Dharma from your 
experience, because if you were to do so, you would end up wasting 
your life. 
ATTACHMENT TO SIGNS AND INDICATIONS 
10. The ignorant think an ox's hoofprint filled with water is the 
ocean and look for gems therein, 
Yet this water will soon evaporate. Likewise, those who take their 
passing experiences to be enlightenment 
Will not see the perfect qualities. By developing a stable and 
perfect mind, 
The mind clinging to passing experience as perfect will evaporate. 
The tenth verse is an instruction to abandon attachment to extraordi­
nary experiences and signs in our meditation practice. When we practice 
54 A SONG FOR THE KING 
meditation, we are working with our mind in a different way, and so we 
start to experience thoughts and appearances we have not experienced 
before. We can become quite impressed with these experiences. We may 
have new thoughts or see things that we take as indications of attain­
ment. If we become attached to these appearances, they become a diver­
sion from· the pursuit of a genuine path, because we have become 
attached to something that is conditioned and temporary. The first line 
reads: "The ignorant think an ox's hoofprint filled with water is the 
ocean and look for gems therein, yet this water will soon evaporate." 
Taking a transitory experience or vision that may occur during medita­
tion to be real attainment is like mistaking a hoofprint filled with water 
for the ocean. Not only is the hoofprint much smaller than the ocean, 
it does not even possess any of the wonderful things found within the 
ocean, such as jewels. Further, a hoofprint full of water will evaporate, 
whereas the ocean will not. In the same way, these meditative experiences 
are transitory, and becoming attached to them will only turn us away 
from a true path. 
The verse continues: "Likewise, those who take their passing experi­
ences to be enlightenment will not see the perfect qualities. By devel­
oping a stable and perfect mind, the mind clinging to passing experience 
as perfect will evaporate." When we practice meditation, we can expe­
rience all sorts of things. We might see visions, we might hear extraor­
dinary sounds, and we might experience cognitive states that are 
unprecedented. But none of these experiences have any use whatsoever 
in themselves. The only purpose of practice is to recognize the nature of 
mind. If, impressed with transitory experiences, we allow ourselves to be 
diverted from that single intention, we will be mistaking a hoofprint for 
the ocean. 
GROUND MAHAMUDRA 55 
Identifying the Meaning of the Ground 
Within this extensive presentation of the ground, the previous four 
verses were all concerned with pointing out the danger of misunder­
standing the ground and the need to abandon these errors. In this sec­
tion we will look at verses II through 14, which by means of four 
analogies explain why the qualities of an authentic understanding of the 
ground can be developed and need to be developed. 
REALIZATION WILL REMOVE FAULTS 
II. Just as the ocean's salty water 
Taken into the clouds turns sweet, 
The stable mind works to benefit others; 
The poison of objects turns into healing nectar. 
Verse II illustrates that if we realize the true nature of the mind, this 
realization itself will remove all defects and problems. These could be of 
various types-disturbing thoughts or emotions, experiences of intense 
sadness or regret. They can all be removed through the recognition of 
mind's nature in mahamudra practice. How this i,s possible is explained 
here through an analogy of ocean water. We cannot drink seawater 
because it is too salty. Nevertheless, after the ocean's water evaporates, 
gathers into clouds, and returns to the earth as rain, it has become pure. 
No longer salty, it is fit to drink. 
The meaning of this analogy is as follows. We continually give rise to 
various forms of disturbing emotions. For example, when we encounter 
an external object that makes us angry, this experience of anger causes 
us to be unhappy. If we act on this anger, others can suffer as well. To 
give another example: When we are frustrated by the failure of our 
endeavors, we can become highly anxious and miserable, and this may 
56 A SONG FOR THE KING 
last for our whole life. In each of these situations, it seems to us that the 
disturbing emotion or suffering that arises in our mind is very solid and 
powerful. Since it is so intense, it appears to be more powerful than we 
feel we are. However, if we actually look and meditate on the mind's 
nature, we discover that all the things arising in our mind-thoughts, 
disturbing emotions, sadness, and misery-are mere appearances. If we 
scrutinize them, looking to see what they really are and where they really 
are, we will discover they are empty of substance and location. When we 
look directly at the thoughts, disturbing emotions, and misery that arise 
in our mind, we cannot find where they are located or where they came 
from or whether they have a shape or color. We never find any of these 
qualities that all the objects seem to have. 
Examining here means looking at the thought within the mind, not 
examining the object that inspired the thought or the condition that 
led to the disturbing emotion. It is scrutiny of the thought itself; we 
directly observe the emptiness of the thought. Whether we do this in the 
context of benefiting others-as the verse states, "the stable mind works 
to benefit others"-or simply in the context of benefiting ourselves, what 
happens when we see the nature of thoughts is that the previously poi­
sonous quality of the thought, the disturbing emotion, or the suffering 
is transformed into a situation of great benefit. And so as the verse states, 
"the poison of objects turns into healing nectar." We believe that dis­
turbing emotions are terrible, that thoughts are bad, and that sadness is 
a shame. But the nature of these conditions that arise in our mind is 
actually flawless bliss. Since we do not recognize their nature, we are 
afflicted by them. Actually, in and of themselves, thoughts and emo­
tions are not bad, because their nature is peace. Nevertheless, as long as 
disturbing emotions arise as afflictions, they are, of course, a problem. 
When we recognize the nature of thoughts, disturbing emotions, or sad­
ness, it is like experiencing a healing nectar. The poison of thoughts and 
disturbing emotions is transformed into amrita. 
GROUND MAHAMUDRA 57 
In the context of the gradual instruction of mahamudra, this process 
of scrutinizing thoughts is called looking at the mind within occurrence, 
or looking at the moving mind. It is normally preceded by the practice 
of looking at the mind within stillness. This latter practice means that 
when we are in a.stable state of meditation, we look directly at our own 
mind. Specifically, we look to see where and what the mind is. Through 
this investigation we eventually discover that there is no location and no 
substance of mind to be found. In this way, we resolve experientially 
that the mind is empty. 
This eleventh verse presents looking at the mind in motion. Occur­
rence, or movement, means that a thought occurs within the mind. 
The thought could be any kind of thought-an angry thought, a jeal­
ous thought, an arrogant thought, a desirous thought, a sad thought, a 
happy thought, or a compassionate thought. Whatever the content of 
the thought may be, when we recognize that a thought has arisen, we 
look directly at it. In looking at the thought, we see its nature and dis­
cover that it is like the nature of the mind itself: it has no location and 
no substance. It is empty. So through the practice of looking at the 
mind within the occurrence of thought, we transform the mind's appar­
ent poison into healing nectar, which is its true nature. 
DESPITE FEAR, REALIZATION TuRNS INTO Buss 
12. When you realize the ineffable, it is neither suffering nor bliss. 
When there is nothing to meditate upon, wisdom itself is bliss. 
Likewise, though thunder may evoke fear, 
The falling of rain makes harvests ripen. 
This twelfth verse is concerned with the benefit of realizing the inex­
pressible or ineffable, which here refers to emptiness. When we use 
the word emptiness or empty, it can sound very threatening. Its literal 
58 A SONG FOR THE KING 
meaning is "nothing," making it sound like annihilation, but the nature 
of emptiness is great peace or great bliss. We may incorrectly fear the real­
ization of emptiness, believing that this realization will produce the anni­
hilation of experience; however, the realization of emptiness is the 
realization of great peace and great tranquility. When the realization of 
emptiness occurs, it is different from what we fear it will be, because 
there is nothing within emptiness that inherently justifies the fear. 
Emptiness is not in and of itself negative or threatening. 
The word emptiness, of course, connotes nothingness and makes us 
think of something like empty space, a mere absence, such as the absence 
of any qualities or content. But the emptiness of the mind is what is 
called "emptiness endowed with the best of all aspects." This means that 
while the mind is empty, it is not a voidness; rather, it is cognitive lucid­
ity. This means, for example, that when you look at your mind, you do 
not find the mind, nor do you see thoughts in terms of their having a 
location or possessing substantial characteristics. The mind and the 
thoughts within the mind are empty but they are not nothing, because 
the.re is an unceasing display of mind's cognition. This shows that the 
absence of substantial existence does not mean that the mind is dead like 
a stone. For this reason, the realization of this absence of true existence 
does not cause the cessation of experience. 
While being empty of any kind of substantial existence, the mind 
remains an unceasing awareness. Yet, when you look for it, you cannot 
find it anywhere; you cannot find anything substantial because the mind 
is empty. It is also unchanging. If the mind were not empty; if the mind 
had solidity or substantial existence, it would definitely change. Often 
called "the inexpressible" or "that which is beyond intellect," the mind's 
emptiness is the reason that the mind is unchanging. And because the 
mind is unchanging, its nature is great bliss. 
The analogy in verse 12 is the sound of thunder, which repres~nts empti­
ness, or more precisely, our·concept of emptiness. A child, for example, 
GROUND MAHAMUDRA 59 
may be frightened by the sound of thunder and may perceive it as threat­
ening. But when you think about it, thunder is a good thing, because 
thunder is a sign of rain, which ripens the crops. In the same way, while 
we might think of emptiness as threatening and negative, in fact its nature 
is great bliss, and therefore the realization of emptiness is very positive. 
APPEARANCE AND EMPTINESS ARE NoNDUAL 
13. First a thing and in the end a nonthing-neither is established; 
likewise, there is nothing other than these two. 36 
There is no place to abide in the beginning, middle, or end. 
For those whose minds are obscured by continual concepts, 
Emptiness and compassion are expressed in words. 
The next verse is concerned with the lack of an inherent substance in the 
arising, abiding, and cessation of thoughts. Or we could say that it deals 
with the unity of appearance and emptiness, which then brings forth the 
realization of the unity of emptiness and compassion. 
When we consider the nature of mind or the essential nature of the 
thoughts that arise in the mind, we assume that these things must have 
begun somehow and somewhere. They must dwell somewhere and at 
some point they must cease. But when we actually look at how a thought 
arises and what actually happens, we don't find anything creating the 
thought, nor do we find the location of this arising. When we look for 
the characteristics that a thought might possess, such as color and shape, 
we do not find them. When we look to see where the thought is, even 
though it is vividly present within the mind, we cannot find it anywhere. 
The thought is not specifically located in any place within the body nor 
outside the body nor in some area in betWeen. We must conclude that 
not only does the thought not truly arise, but it also does not abide or 
rest anywhere. 
60 A SONG FOR THE KING 
Finally, when a thought disappears, we look to see what really hap­
pens. Where does it go? We do not find anything. In this way, we are 
brought to the conclusion that thoughts do not truly arise, do not truly 
abide, and do not truly cease. Whether recognized or not, the nature of 
our mind has always been just this. It is not that the discovery of this 
nature makes the mind empty, because the mind has always been so. 
The problem is that we have never looked into our mind. We have 
always turned and looked outward, or away from it. This is the mean­
ing of the thirteenth verse. 
Verse 13 also answers this question: What qualities are produced by 
meditation on emptiness? The purpose of Dharma is to help others, and 
the root of this is compassion. But if all things are empty and if the 
emptiness of things is realized, is there then no object and therefore no 
root of compassion? This verse answers that question in the negative. A;; 
the Third Karmapa, Rangjung Dorje, pointed out in his Aspiration 
Prayer of Mahtimudrti: "The very recognition of emptiness itself is the 
root of compassion." This is because the realization of mind's empty 
nature and the realization of phenomena's empty nature produces a state 
of well-being and tranquility in the mind. Disturbing emotions and suf­
fering are pacified, and this causes all manner of positive qualities to 
develop within the mind. When we realize the true nature of mind, we 
gain the understanding that all beings without exception possess this 
same nature, this same potential to achieve all of the positive qualities 
through realization. At the same time, we realize that only those few 
fortunate individuals who recognize the nature of mind have all their 
suffering pacified and so compassion arises for those who have not 
attained this realization. 
In general, we do not look at our mind and, therefore, do not recog­
nize the nature of the mind and the nature of the thoughts. Rather, we 
are caught up by these thoughts, which then generate disturbing emo­
tions, which lead to suffering. Since the basic nature of ordinary beings 
GROUND MAHAMUDRA 61 
is the same as the nature of those who have realized mind's nature, we 
come to see that all of this suffering is really unnecessary: since beings 
possess this nature, they do not need to suffer at all. This recognition is 
why the realization of emptiness is the root of compassion. The Third 
Karmapa wrote: "May intolerable compassion be born in my mind 
through the realization of emptiness." The compassion that is born 
through realization is not merely words but intolerably intense. 
How AN EXPERT DIFFERS FROM A DUNCE 
14. Just as the nectar dwelling within a flower 
Is known by the bumblebee, 
The fortunate toss away neither existence nor nirvana. 
Like them, the ignorant should fully understand. 
This verse is concerned with the fact that even though all beings with­
out exception possess the same nature of mind, the mere possession of 
this buddha nature is not enough. It must be thought about and medi­
tated upon. Saraha illustrates this with the analogy of the fortunate and 
the ignorant, or a wise person and a foolish person. In contrast to verse 
8, the expert (here the fortunate one) represents the positive side and the 
foolish person the negative one. The analogy is the following. In a lake 
there is a lotus flower and in the midst of that lotus flower there is nec­
tar, the potential for honey. A bee, representing the wise person, recog­
nizes the presence of the nectar within the lotus flower and drinks its 
nectar. 
In that same way, knowing about the presence of mind's nature, a 
learned person meditates on it and realizes it. On the other hand, the 
foolish person is like a frog. A frog lives in the lake adjacent to the lotus 
flower but doesn't know about the nectar within the flower and there­
fore does not enjoy its delicious taste. The frog illustrates that while all 
62 A SONG FOR THE KING 
beings have the same nature of mind, when they do not know about it, 
they do not meditate on it and therefore do not realize it. 
The last four verses have explained why the proper practice of the 
path will lead to realization. In the next set of four verses, we are going 
to look at what should be abandoned and what should be realized 
through combining congruent and incongruent analogies. 
Indicating the Essential Nature 
NoNATTACHMENT TO WHAT Is UNTRUE 
15. Just as an image appears on the mirror's surface, 
Where the ignorant look in their lack ofknowledge, 
So the .mind that throws away the truth 
Relies on many concepts that are not true. 
This verse uses the analogy of a mirror's reflection to instruct us about 
abandoning our belief in and fixation on the reality of impure appear­
ances. According to the analogy, if a small child who does not know 
about mirrors looks at his or her reflection, he or she may think that 
there is actually another child there. The child becomes attached to the 
reflection, thinking that it is a potential friend or playmate, and yet it 
is a mere reflection and nothing to be attached to. Similarly, when a 
monkey looks in a mirror, it sees its reflection as another monkey, who 
is a potential threat or competitor, and so the monkey bares its teeth 
and ferociously glares at its own reflection. 
Just as the reflection in a mirror is not the actual presence of an object 
evoking attachment or aggression, in the same way, what appears in the 
mind is also not an object of attachment or aversion. Whether we are 
speaking of reflections or what appears within the mind, none of them 
have any intrinsic reality. Failing to understand this, we take them to be 
real. For example, when anger arises in our mind and we look at its 
GROUND MAHAMUDRA 63 
nature, we can see that this anger has no true existence. However, if we 
do not look at the nature of the anger, it will seem real and thereby over­
whelm us. When unhappiness arises in our mind, if we look at its nature, 
we see that it has no substantial characteristics-no color, shape, form, 
and so on. But if we never look at its nature, we will not recognize .its 
lack of reality and will thereby come under its control. 
It is important notto be caught by disturbing emotions appearing in 
our mind, because if we follow them, they will engulf us. If we are caught 
up by unhappiness or regret, it will oppress us with sadness. To keep 
from being overpowered by the afflictions, we should just look at the 
nature of whatever is arising in our mind. 
If we think the reflections in the mirror are real, they will enslave us. 
If we follow after the disturbing emotions and mental states that arise 
within us, we become their servant, losing our freedom and control. 
However, if we recognize their nature, we will realize that it is peace and 
bliss. Therefore, to achieve realization, it is necessary to understand that 
these disturbing emotions and mental states do not ultimately exist; they 
are mere appearances like the images in a mirror. In mahamudra prac­
tice, we come to know the true nature of these mental states not by 
inference but through direct observation. 
CONTINUOUS MEDITATIVE CONCENTRATION 
16. Though the fragrance of a flower has no form, 
It clearly pervades everywhere. 
Likewise, through the formless nature 
The circles of the mandalas will be known. 37 
The previous verse instructed us not to be attached to appearances, dis­
turbing emotions, and mental states. The sixteenth verse points out that 
we must recognize dharmata, which can be recognized even though it is 
64 A SONG FOR THE KING 
not a substantial entity. From the very beginning, dharmata, the nature 
of mind, has been emptiness, and, consequently, it has no substantial 
existence. Nevertheless, we can familiarize ourselves with dharmata and 
realize it, thereby achieving the final fruition. While it can be experi­
enced and realized, dharmata cannot be perceived by the senses, because 
it has no substantial characteristics. 
The analogy presented in this verse is the fragrance of flowers. If 
flowers are present in one room, their fragrance will waft into the adja­
cent rooms. If you are in a neighboring room, however, you will not see 
flowers even though the room you are in is filled with their fragrance. In 
the same way, having no form and being empty, dharmata cannot be per­
ceived in the usual way. Yet in mahamudra practice, you can experience 
this emptiness through your direct observation of the mind, which is 
not, however, observation in the usual sense. Furthermore, in the prac­
tice of mahamudra, we are not attempting to transform something that 
exists into something that does not exist, nor to transform something 
that does not exist into something that does exist. This nature is the 
inherent emptiness of all phenomena and of the mind in particular. This 
emptiness, which we observe in the mind, is not a dead emptiness or a 
voidness, because it also has luminous clarity or wisdom. While it is 
emptiness, it is also lucidity, and while it is lucidity, it is also empty. This 
is the nature of mind that must be known. Although it has no substan­
tial form or existence, it can be experienced because of its luminous clar­
ity. It is this that must be understood, and it is this nature that must be 
realized. When the mind's nature is recognized, the result is the mani­
festation of the three bodies, or the arising of the mandala of the three 
kayas-the dharmakaya, sambhogakaya, and nirmal)akaya. 
Through the recognition that mind itself is unborn and empty, what 
must be abandoned is abandoned. This can happen because we recog­
nize that what is to be abandoned has no true existence. Through this 
recognition, it is liberated by its own nature. Further, when the nature 
GROUND MAHAMUDRA 65 
of mind is recognized, we realize not just its emptiness but also its lucid­
ity. By recognizing the lucidity, we attain what must be attained, which 
is the dharmakaya. 
The qualities of the dharmakaya are wisdom, loving-kindness, and 
the ability to protect. In its wisdom, the dharmakaya knows the ultimate 
truth. Having realized that ultimate nature, it sees the nature of all things 
just as it is, which is called the wisdom of the true nature of phenom­
ena. Does the dharmakaya know only the absolute nature of things? No, 
it also knows the manifestations, the variety of the appearances of all 
phenomena. It knows the characteristics of all appearances and it knows 
that these appearances are confusion. So this wisdom sees dharmata, or 
emptiness, and it also knows the ignorance of beings. This wisdom that 
knows the bewilderment of beings is called the wisdom of the variety of 
phenomena, or we could say the wisdom that knows the variety of all the 
appearances of relative truth. 
An analogy for this is the following. Imagine that a person is lying 
asleep in bed and dreaming. Beside the sleeping person is a second per­
son with clairvoyance, who is awake and fully aware of the content of the 
other person's dreams. The person with extrasensory perception knows 
that the person who is asleep is just asleep in bed and what that person 
is experiencing is just dreams. In the same way, a buddha personally 
does not experience ignorance or confusion but does see the ignorance 
of beings in all its detail and variety. 
The dharmakaya possesses this excellent wisdom, which knows both 
ultimate truth and relative truth. Through this excellent and consum­
mate wisdom, the Buddha naturally possesses great compassion for all 
beings who are suffering, for those who are carried away by their dis­
turbing emotions, and even for those who are not presently suffering but 
are still confused. So the dharmakaya, the mind of a buddha, possesses 
not only this twofold wisdom but also consummate loving-kindness. Pos­
sessing this wisdom and loving-kindness, a buddha sees all beings with 
66 A SONG FOR THE KING 
compassion. The dharmakaya can protect beings: the Buddha is able 
to help and benefit them through an immense variety of methods. In 
sum, the mind of the Buddha, the dharmakaya, possesses the qualities 
of wisdom, loving-kindness, and ability to help, which are the result 
of the path. 
From the dharmakaya arise the sambhogakaya and nirmal).akaya, 
which together make up the rupakaya, or form body. The dharmakaya 
with its qualities of wisdom, loving-kindness, and ability to protect is 
considered the causal condition for these other two form bodies. Th~ 
dharmakaya, however, cannot be visited or experienced by ordinary sen­
tient beings, and so it emanates the form bodies. For those with purified 
karma, bodhisattvas abiding on any of the ten bodhisattva levels, the 
dharmakaya manifests as the sambhogakaya. The sambhogakaya, or per­
fect enjoyment body, is called the enjoyment body because in the sam­
bhogakaya realm, Dharma is continually taught and one never needs to 
pass into parinirvana. In that way, the sambhogakaya is endowed with 
what are called the five certainties of the perfect teacher, teachings, ret­
inue, place, and time. 
For those individuals with impure karma, like most of us ordinary 
beings who cannot visit or encounter the sambhogakaya, the dharma­
kaya emanates as the nirmal).akaya, which is relatively impure. An exam­
ple of the nirmal).akaya is a buddha who comes into the world, performs 
the twelve deeds of a buddha, and teaches ordinary beings, as the his­
torical Sakyamuni Buddha did. In sum, the three kayas arise as a result 
of having meditated on the true nature. 
How HABITS REIFY CoNCEPTS 
17· When a wintry wind strikes and stirs up water, 
Though soft, it takes the form of stone. 
GROUND MAHAMUDRA 67 
When concepts attempt to disturb mind's nature, where igno­
rance cannot take form, 
Appearances become very dense and solid. 
The seventeenth verse illustrates that all appearances are the appearances 
of the mind. Earth, stones, mountains, rocks, and so forth, all seem very 
solid to us, so it is quite hard to understand how these things could be 
merely the appearances of our mind. The Ocean of Definitive Meaning 
points this out in stages: First it shows that appearances are mind; then 
that mind is emptiness; further, that emptiness is spontaneously present; 
and finally, that spontaneous presence is liberated in and of itself. The 
subject of this verse is this same point. While earth, mountains, and 
rocks in their true nature are no different from our mind, in terms of 
how they appear, they seem vast, huge, and very solid. We might won­
der, How can our mind encompass and perceive what is so big and so 
apparently solid? The analogy here is of water and ice. When it is not 
frozen, water is a liquid; but when a body of water is subjected to a very 
cold wind, it freezes and becomes ice, which is hard like stone. Nor­
mally we don't think of water as being hard, and yet ice is water and it 
is hard. 
In this same way, when our mind is disturbed by ignorance and dis­
turbing emotions, which resemble the cold wind, it produces coarse 
thoughts. The gradual production of coarser and coarser thoughts, 
which entail coarser and coarser modes of appearance, corresponds to the 
gradual freezing of the water. These coarse thoughts cause the solid 
appearance of earth and mountains, even though the thoughts them­
selves began as mere insubstantial things. 
In sum, the seventeenth verse is a generalized presentation of the fact 
that appearances are mind. 
68 A SONG FOR THE KING 
MIND Is NoT AFFECTED BY STAINS 
18. The true nature of any state of mind is free of flaws 
And unaffected by the mire of existence and nirvana. 
Even so, if a supreme gem is placed in a swamp, 
Its radiance will not be clear. 
The analogy presented here is of a jewel that has somehow fallen into a 
swamp. The jewel itself has excellent color and shape and is completely 
pure in being a jewel. It does not degenerate at all while mired in the 
swamp; it remains exactly what it was. On the other hand, it can't be 
used. The jewel's qualities are not apparent because it is concealed. If the 
jewel is removed from the swamp and the mud is cleaned away, the jewel 
will be a perfect jewel and can be used appropriately. In the same way, 
as long as our mind is immersed in bewildered appearances, we cannot 
gain. access to and make use of the mind's innate qualities. Through 
meditation, however, if we can separate the mind from ignorance, we 
will be able to make use of the innate qualities of the mind to engage in 
effortless and spontaneous benefit for ourselves and others. 
Although the mind is empty, it is not empty in the sense of being a 
voidness. The mind's basic nature is simultaneously emptiness and cog­
nitive lucidity. This nature has never been damaged or even affected by 
all the appearances, confusion, and ignorance within the three realms of 
samsara. So we have to ask, Is liberation from samsara actually effecting 
a change in the mind at all? It is not. From the very beginning the mind 
has been empty and lucid. 
In meditation, therefore, we are not trying to change what the mind 
is; we are not trying to make what is not empty into something that is 
empty or to make something that is not lucid into something that is 
lucid. All we are doing in the practice of meditation is experiencing the 
mind as it is and as it always has been. When the mind is experienced 
GROUND MAHAMUDRA 69 
and finally realized, that is liberation. There is no need to change the 
mind's nature, because the nature of the mind has never been affected 
by any confusion. 
Often the nature of the mind is called buddha nature or sugatagarbha 
("the essential nature of those gone to bliss"). When the term sugata­
garbha is used, even though it refers to the nature of our own mind, it 
is thought of as a high state, as something very distant from us and 
unapproachable. It is therefore important to understand what sugata­
garbha really means. Sugata means "those gone to bliss." The syllable su 
here is "bliss," which means that if you recognize and realize the nature 
of mind, you eliminate the suffering of samsara: the result of realizing 
the mind's nature is bliss. Gata, or "gone," means that innumerable 
buddhas have appeared and all of them have achieved enlightenment 
through realizing the nature of their mind and thereby attaining the 
bliss of full awakening. 
All of the buddhas began as confused, bewildered sentient beings. 
They transcended the ignorance and suffering of samsara and entered 
into bliss. It is up to us now to follow the example of the buddhas and 
realize the nature of our mind and discover this indwelling bliss. Do we 
have the ability to do so? Yes, we have the innate capacity to follow and 
emulate those who have gone to bliss. If we lacked some qualities or 
abilities that they had, we might not be able to do it, but in the nature 
of our mind, we have everything that they ever had or have. Since we 
have what they.have and they accomplished full awakening, we can do 
it also. This is why the nature of the mind is called the essential nature 
of those gone to bliss. 
The Uttaratantra states: "Like a jewel, like space, and like pure water, 
it is continually free of disturbance." When a jewel is purified and the 
dirt that surrounds it is removed, the nature of the jewel itself does not 
change. The jewel was always a jewel in its nature or composition. Like­
wise, when clouds disappear from the sky, the space of the sky does not 
70 A SONG FOR THE KING 
undergo any change. The space was not inherently affected or polluted 
in its nature by the presence of the clouds. The third example is water. 
Water in itself is just pure water; it only becomes polluted when sedi­
ment is mixed with it. But even so, the water itself remains just water. 
Muddy water is water combined with something 'else, but the water is 
not in itself changed or damaged by the presence of the sediment. 
In the same way, while our mind is afflicted and obscured by igno­
rance, disturbing emotions, and thoughts, the nature of the mind is not 
touched by their presence. However, when these obscurations are pres­
ent, the qualities of the mind's nature will not be evident. So it says in 
the verse, "Even so, if a supreme gem is placed in a swamp, its radiance 
will not be clear." 
The Dependent Arising of Cause and Effect 
THE BASIS FOR SAMSARA AND NIRVANA 
19. When stupidity is clear, wisdom is unclear. 
When stupidity is clear, suffering is clear. 
Like this, from a seed, a seedling arises; 
With this seedling as a cause, offshoots appear. 
This verse describes why we wander iri samsara and how the confused 
appearances of samsara increase and spread. All samsara begins with 
ignorance, and in this verse, ignorance is referred to as a state of stupid­
ity. By its nature, stupidity is unclear. It is an absence of knowledge, a 
lack of recognizing ultimate truth, which could be called a mere lack of 
clarity. However, simultaneous with that lack of recognition, there is a 
great clarity of ignorance in the projection of relative truth.38 & samsara 
increases, it becomes clearer and clearer. 
The basic nature that lies within every living being can be called the 
sugatagarbha or the dharmadhatu. Dharmadhatu refers primarily to the 
GROUND MAHAMUDRA 71 
aspect of emptiness, and sugatagarbha refers primarily to the aspect of 
wisdom. The inability to recognize this basic nature of mind is called 
ignorance. It is the beginning of the eighth (alaya) consciousness. 39 This 
failure to recognize the mind's nature occurs because the empty aspect 
of the mind's nature is not recognized due to the appearance of its lucid 
aspect. This causes ignorance and the arising of the eighth consciousness 
along with the habits it holds, which produce confused appearances. As 
these bewildered appearances increase, from the eighth consciousness 
arise the afflicted seventh consciousness and then the six functioning 
consciousnesses (the five sensory consciousnesses and the mental con­
sciousness). At that point, the structure of the bewildered appearances 
of samsara is fully established. This process of intensification is described 
in the verse: "When stupidity is clear, wisdom is unclear." As the stu­
pidity of samsara becomes more and more vivid and distinct, the under­
lying wisdom becomes less and less clear and more and more obscured; 
This is the same idea expressed in the previous verse with the lines "If a 
supreme gem is placed in a swamp, its radiance will not be clear." The 
radiance of the wisdom is obscured by the intensity of the stupidity. 
When the mind is bewildered, the alaya consciousness begins to accu­
mulate negative habits and tendencies. The alaya consciousness itself is 
not confused; it is mere cognitive lucidity. Nevertheless, it functions as 
the foundation for accumulating negative habits and for misperceiving 
the existence of the self. When we have this incorrect view that takes the 
self to exist, we also develop the incorrect view that the other exists as 
well. Through the increase of negative habits, based on thinking that a 
self and other exist, negative karmic latencies enter the alaya conscious­
ness, and this leads to the arising of the other seven consciousnesses. 
Even though they are nonconceptual consciousnesses, the five sense 
consciousnesses arise as the result of habits accrued in the alaya con­
sciousness. The five sense consciousnesses are limited to perceiving a 
specific sensory input; for example, the eye consciousness just sees, the 
72 A SONG FOR THE KING 
ear consciousness just hears, and so forth. The sensory consciousnesses 
do not appraise, recognize, judge, or in any way conceptualize what they 
see, hear, and so on. The sixth consciousness, the mental consciousness, 
is the consciousness that appraises, identifies,. and judges what is per­
ceived by the five sense consciousnesses. Therefore, it is the sixth con­
sciousness that makes errors, such as believing different things to be 
essentially one and the same. 
With the development of all eight consciousnesses, there is a state of 
full-blown ignorance, which is clear. The verse reads: "When stupidity 
is clear, wisdom is unclear." When wisdom is clear, the nature of the 
mind is realized. But when bewilderment, stupidity, and ignorance are 
clear, the true nature of mind is obscured. This leads to disturbing emo­
tions, which in turn lead to the accumulation of negative karma, which 
then leads to suffering. Strictly speaking, not everything that results from 
actions causes suffering, because actions are of different types (positive, 
negative, and neutral) and so their results may be different. Nonetheless, 
directly or indirectly, the result of the disturbing emotions is suffering. 
For exa~ple, being very ill is obviously suffering and is called the suf­
fering of suffering. But even an experience of happiness or well-being 
will change into a state of suffering because it is impermanent. In this 
sense, even states of temporary well-being are called the suffering of 
change. Furthermore, the pervasive environment of impermanence in 
which we live causes everything to turn eventually into suffering; this is 
called all-pervasive suffering. These three types of suffering are the result 
of the bewildered projections or appearances of samsara. 
This verse presents an analogy to illustrate how the progressive 
intensification of stupidity causes suffering: "From a seed, a seedling 
arises; with this seedling as a cause, offshoots appear." Ignorance is the 
seed. When it is planted in the ground, it produces a seedling, from 
which emerges a stalk, and eventually branches grow from the stalk. In 
the same way, through increasing stupidity, we begin to suffer. This 
GROUND MAHAMUDRA 73 
suffering keeps us in the midst of samsaric· appearances, which always 
entail suffering in one way or another. Sometimes we experience the suf­
fering of suffering, sometimes we experience the suffering of change, 
and sometimes we experience all-pervasive suffering. But we always expe­
rience suffering. 
The verse also shows us, by implication, how to put an end to suf­
fering. Everyone wants to stop suffering. Since the immediate cause of 
suffering is the disturbing emotions, it is clear that in order to get rid of 
the three kinds of suffering, we have to eliminate the disturbing emo­
tions. When we look for the cause of disturbing emotions, we see that 
it is ignorance; obviously, we have to get rid of our ignorance if we want 
to lose these disturbing emotions. Remember that ignorance began with 
not seeing dharmata, the true nature of our mind. So the remedy for 
ignorance is evident: seeing our mind's true nature. 
If we see the true nature of dharmata, then ignorance and bewilder­
ment will vanish. Within the sutras, which emphasize vastness, we would 
refer to this nature as the dharmata, the nature of all things, often 
explained as the unity of space and wisdom. Within the secr~t mantra, 
or the Vajrayana, which emphasiz~s profundity and not so much the 
vast scope of the mind's natui:e, we would refer to this as the nature of 
our mind. We can also think of our mind as the nature of the sixth con­
sciousness or the nature of the eighth consciousness. In either case, it is 
through looking at the nature of our mind that ignorance will be 
removed. We are bewildered and ignorant, because we have never looked 
into and realized this true nature. If we_ directly recognize it, we will 
eliminate ignorance, which is like the seed, and so the seedling will not 
grow, the stalk will not appear, and the branches will not develop. 
74 A SONG FOR THE KING 
TRANSCENDING ANALYSIS 
20. In analyzing the mind with the reasoning of being neither one nor 
many, 
If you discard the clear aspect of mind's nature, you will descend 
to the lower realms; 
While gazing at that suffering, you fall into its bottomless pit. 
How could one have anything but compassion for this? 
This verse is concerned with the relationship between the wisdom aris­
ing from hearing and contemplation and then from meditation. It is 
concerned with showing that the wisdom of meditation is more impor­
tant than the wisdom of hearing and the wisdom of contemplation. By 
cultivating these two, we can establish that emptiness is the nature of 
phenomena. To do this we employ various modes of logical analysis to 
show that coarse external objects ilre merely collections or aggregates of 
the subtle objects and that subtle objects themselves are aggregates and 
so on until we show that things have no true existence. 
This argument based on the aggregates can also be applied to the mind 
·to show that it does not exist as the entity it appears to be. In the con­
text of hearing and thinking, there are the four or five great logical argu­
ments within the Middle Way school. These arguments are the refutation 
of things being truly one or many, the refutation of production through 
the four extremes, and so forth. Going through these logical arguments 
definitely helps us to understand emptiness. But this process only pro­
duces an intellectual certainty. If you retain attachment to that concep­
tual certainty of emptiness, you will prevent that conceptual view from 
performing its true function: to generate certainty that emptiness is the 
nature of all things so that you are inspired to meditate on it and expe­
rience it directly. If you do not practice meditation, you will not be able 
to relinquish attachment to that mere conceptual certainty, which can be 
relinquished only through this third wisdom arising from meditation. 
GROUND MAHAMUDRA 75 
Compared to the other two, which are based on inferential cognition, 
this wisdom is very dear because it is based on direct valid cognition. 
Therefore the stanza says, "In analyzing the mind with the reasoning of 
being neither one nor many, if you discard the dear aspect of mind's 
nature .... " "Clear" here refers to the clarity of the wisdom that arises 
from meditation. So if you remain attached to the conceptual view 
gained through logical analysis, you will not be able to transcend the 
bewildered appearances of samsara and will continue to live in cyclic 
existence. 
The next lines state: "While gazing at that suffering, you fall into its 
bottomless pit. How could one have anything but compassion for this?" 
These lines point to the situation we have just discussed: After engen­
dering certainty, you remain bound to it and do not practice meditation. 
This is like someone who knowingly jumps into a bottomless pit, a clas­
sic metaphor for samsara. Beings are constantly jumping into that pit, 
but they do so without knowing what they are doing. What is even more 
tragic, however, is when someone who knows it is a bottomless pit still 
jumps in. This is what you are doing if you stay attached to the con­
ceptual certainty achieved through analysis and thereby do not practice 
meditation. 
The text implies that we should not work with the Middle Way log­
ical arguments but just practice meditation; however, it is helpful from 
time to time to study these logical arguments without becoming 
attached to them. The problem is not the logical methods or the cer­
tainty they produce but our attachment to them. For example, Milarepa 
said to Gampopa: "While meditating on mahamudra, do not engage in 
logical analysis. Nonconceptual wisdom will vanish if you do." It is the 
neglect of direct experience in the practice of meditation that is the prob­
lem. In sum, this verse counsels us not to become so attached to the 
logical analysis of external phenomena that we ignore the practice of 
meditation and the development of direct experience. 
76 A SONG FOR THE KING 
Question: Rinpoche, I have a question about the three types of wisdom 
related to hearing, contemplating, and meditating. What kind of med­
itation is this? If you meditate on emptiness, is it a form of tranquility 
meditation? What kind of meditation is it if you have analyzed a thing? 
What to do when you meditate like that? 
Rinpoche: Inferential valid cognition establishes the view through ana­
lyzing the lack of existence of the object. This meditation is helpful 
because. by gradually becoming certain that an object is not real, you 
will be less likely to be fixated on it. But inferential valid cognition is not 
sufficient to bring about liberation. 
In order to achieve liberation, we need to apply the techniques of 
meditation, which are based on direct valid cognition. When a thought 
arises repeatedly-whether it is a thought of attachment or dislike or 
anything else-if you apply the approach of direct valid cognition, 
you do not consider what the thought is about, nor do you attempt to 
analyze the object of thought to determine its reality or unreality. In 
direct valid cognition, you look at the thought itself. We generally 
tend to think that thoughts arise and, after they have arisen, they are 
truly present. In this method of looking directly at the thought, we 
look to see how and where it arises, how and where it abides, then 
where it dissolves. 
Question: Rinpoche, would you speak about the original source of this 
ignorance? How and why does it arise? 
Rinpoche: Ignorance can be understood in different ways. The literal 
meaning of the word (Tib. ma rig pa) is "absence of knowledge ." It can 
also mean "absence of luminous clarity." What it refers to is not recog­
nizing mind's nature. We think of the mind as obscured, as it lacks a 
GROUND MAHAMUDRA 77 
lucid recognition of its own nature. Nevertheless, the defining charac­
teristic of mind is luminous clarity. So we have to say that from one per­
spective, our mind is dull and obscured and from another, it is intensely 
lucid. Usually the mind is lucid with regard to relative truth and igno­
rant of ultimate truth. This is true because mind has two characteristics. 
The nature of mind is emptiness, but unlike space, the emptiness of 
mind is not a void or nothingness. The other defining characteristic of 
mind is cognitive lucidity, inseparable from the mind's emptiness. It is 
the cognitive lucidity of mind that is the source of the whole variety of 
appearance, or experience, for that mind. Ignorance arises due to the 
intensity of the cognitive lucidity. It is so strong that it somehow con­
ceals or outshines the emptiness, and so the mind fails to recognize its 
own empty nature. That failure, in turn, causes us to misapprehend our 
experience. 
It's a little bit like watching television. When we look at a television, 
what we are seeing are dots and colors on the screen. The vividness and 
clarity of these colors allows us to perceive what they are supposed to 
represent. When we watch a television program, we have no trouble 
identifYing places, persons, animals, mountains, and sp on. Through 
becoming involved with the program, we identifY wiih what we are 
seeing and begin to feel an emotional response. Actually, what we are 
looking at are not places, persons, animals, or mountains, but points of 
light on a tube in a little box. The confusion that is necessary to enjoy 
a television program is similar to bewilderment or ignorance, where 
the very vividness or intensity of the images of the mind's lucidity over­
powers the mind. 
Question: Would you explain more about superimposition and denial? 
Rinpoche: Superimposition, or exaggeration, is the mistaken belief that 
something exists when it actually does not exist. To give an example, we 
could have the belief that all appearances are truly existent. In reality, 
78 A SONG FOR THE KING 
however, they are not truly existent but empty, although to a confused 
person they seem real. In terms of direct cognition, superimposition is 
when we look at the mind and make the mistake of believing thoughts 
and. emotions are real. 
The other mistake, denial, occurs when we believe that what actually 
exists does not exist. In the context of inference, we may decide that 
emptiness is not the ultimate truth. In the context of direct experience, 
we may fail to recognize the mind's nature as being the unity of empti­
ness and cognitive lucidity. 
Path Mahamudra 4 
'VTE NEED TO ENTER A PATH, and having entered it, we should 
W reach the end of the path and attain its fruition. Just entering 
the path is not enough, and to reach its result, we have to make sure that 
we enter the path correctly and avoid mistaken ways. In this section, 
the path of mahamudra is presented in two sections: discarding attach­
ment to mistaken paths and finding the authentic path of mahamudra. 
The first part of the teaching, discarding attachment to mistaken paths, 
has eight sections. 
Discarding Attachment to Mistaken Paths 
ATTACHMENT TO KARMAMUDRA 
21. Once totally attached to kissing and the bliss of what follows, 
The ignorant say that this is indeed the ultimate. 
Having left his house, he stands in front of the gate, 
Soliciting tales of sensual pleasure. 
Verse 21 may seem like a general criticism of the path of method. How­
ever, Saraha is not saying that the path of method is ineffective and will 
not lead to the fruition; what he intends here is that if the path of 
method is not accompanied by recognition of the mind's nature, it is hot 
79 
80 A SONG FOR THE KING 
effective. Pursuing the path of method without the path of liberation, 
which leads to the recognition of mind's nature, you will not find ulti­
mate freedom and omniscience. And conversely, if the path of method 
is accompanied by the recognition of the mind's nature, you will come 
to fruition. 
There is a difference between the path of method and the path of lib­
eration in terms of recognizing the nature of mind. How is this so? The 
most effective way to practice the path is to integrate the path of liber­
ation with the path of method. If that is not possible, we can practice the 
path of liberation alone and it will still be a good and effective path. It 
will lead to abandoning what should be abandoned and realizing what 
should be realized, and therefore it will bring about the fruition of the 
path. On the other hand, practicing the path of method in the complete 
absence of the path ofliberation will not lead to any significant or wor­
thy result. 
In verse 21 Saraha specifically criticizes the view that the practice of 
karmamudra40 without the wisdo.m of mahamudra will lead to awaken­
ing. The analogy is the following. If you are in yqur house, you can enjoy 
all the good things that you have inside; however, if you sit outside your 
house, refusing to go inside and merely talking about the good things that 
are there, you cannot actually enjoy them. In the same way, when you 
attempt to practice the path of method without the path of liberation, 
you are like the person who is sitting outside his or her house and unable 
to enjoy all the things you describe. In sum, this verse is a criticism of the 
practice of karmamudra in isolation from the wisdom of mahamudra. 
ATTACHMENT TO THE SuBTLE Boov 
22. For the sake of the winds, you meditate on your body as an 
empty house, 
Practicing artificial methods in great variety and number. 
From space it falls, along with faults. 41 
Overwhelmed, the yogi faints away. PATH MAHAMUDRA 81 
Verse 22 criticizes the attempt to practice with the subtle channels, 
winds, and drops without engaging in the path of liberation or 
mahamudra. The type of practice that Saraha refers to here is manipu­
lating our subtle channels, winds, and drops 42 to bring about various 
experiences. You can derive benefit from this practice, because it can 
enhance your experience of the mind's nature. But if there is no practice 
of mahamudra-and therefore no experience of the mind's nature to 
begin with-simply working with the subtle channels, winds, and drops 
in isolation will not produce any significant result. Not only that, these 
practices may actually be very dangerous. The verse states: "Over­
whelmed, the yogi faints away." 
In A Songfor the King, there is a dear emphasis on the path of liber­
ation. It is important to understand that it is not that the path of method 
is invalid or useless, but for it to be effective, it must be accompanied by 
the path ofliberation, which is more important. This stanza is not so dif­
ferent from the previous stanzas that dealt with not relying solely on the 
conceptual certainty derived from the logical reasoning and the wisdom 
born of hearing or reflection. Of greater importance than conceptual 
certainty is direct realization, which arises from meditation. In the same 
way, the practice of mahamudra is more important than the practice of 
the methods of karmamudra or the channels, winds, and drops. 
In short, what really matters is recognition of the nature of our mind. 
If this recognition is present and the path of method is not practiced, you 
can still be liberated. If this recognition is absent, then no matter how 
much you practice, the path of method will not bring liberation. 
82 A SONG FOR THE KING 
ATTACHMENT TO PASSING EXPERIENCES 
23. Just as Brahmins make their burnt offerings 
Of ghee and rice in a blazing fire, 
Know that, from Ha1'f'l, the quintessence of space, the substance 
of nectar produces experience; 
The passing experience of bliss is grasped as reality. 
The third instruction concerning what to avoid is not to become 
attached to minor experiences. There are two parts to this verse. The 
analogy is given in the first two lines and the meaning in the second 
two. The Brahmins' burnt offerings are an analogy for the incorrect prac­
tice of the path of method. It is the custom of Brahmins to make fire 
offerings without cultivating samadhi or performing any kind of visual­
ization. Proud of being the highest caste in Indian society, they simply 
assume that igniting these substances and saying the ritual words will be 
of benefit so they burn substances such as ghee and rice to make offer­
ings to the gods. 
If the practice of burnt offerings is accompanied by one-pointed con­
centration (samadhi) and visualization, it can be useful. But if it is just 
setting food ablaze, it will not lead to anything. The offerings do get 
burned up, but aside from that, there is no other real result. 
This example can also refer to practicing the path of method without 
any realization of emptiness. If we practice the path of method, then 
through the power of the techniques themselves, we can indeed cause the 
nectar to descend from the essence of space or the Hai'J'l syllable within 
our head. If we are successful, we will experience physical bliss. But if this 
practice is not conjoined with meditation on emptiness, it cannot pos­
sibly lead to the final result-realizing the unity of bliss and emptiness. 
The drops will descend and you will feel very good for a while, but that 
is it. Nothing else will come of it because an important aspect of the 
PATH MAHAMUDRA 83 
practice is missing. So the point here is that to practice the path of 
method without realizing emptiness is of no greater significance than 
simply throwing food into fire and thinking that this is a grand offering. 
The verse emphasizes the importance of generating authentic experi­
ence and realization. To avoid a possible misunderstanding, it is crucial 
to know what this verse does and does n0t say. As we have seen, our 
path consists of gathering the two accumulations of merit and wisdom, 
which assist one another. For example, on the path of a bodhisattva, the 
first five of the six perfections-generosity, morality, patience, diligence, 
and meditation-enable the development of the sixth, the perfection of 
intelligence or wisdom. Because these perfections are joined with wis­
dom, they become pure and transcendent. We should not think, there­
fore, that this verse says that the practices involving conceptualization are 
to be utterly dismissed. We do make offerings to the Three Jewels, give 
generously to the needy, maintain moral discipline, cultivate patience, 
and so on. All of these practices are important branches of the concep­
tual accumulation of merit. Our practice does not consist only of med­
itation on the mind's nature in isolation from anything else. 
We might incorrectly think that the great Brahmin Saraha has taught 
that all conceptual practices are utterly useless. That would be a misun­
derstanding. These practices are actually very useful. But the point of 
practicing the perfections is the realization of mahamudra. The great 
Santideva in A Guide to the Bodhisattva's mty of Life writes: "These five 
branches were taught by the Buddha for the sake of wisdom." In other 
words, we cultivate the conceptual accumulation of merit to realize 
mahamudra, to achieve the nonconceptual accumulation of wisdom. In 
fact, consciously cultivating the conceptual acc~mulation of merit is 
necessary to develop wisdom. But while we are accumulating this merit, 
we must join it with the nonconceptual accumulation of wisdom. Oth­
erwise, Santideva says, "In the absence of wisdom, the other five virtues 
do not become perfections because they lack the perfection of wisdom." 
84 A SONG FOR THE KING 
So this verse points out that while it is valuable to perform practices, 
such as burnt offerings, on the path of method, they should always be 
conjoined with mahamudra experience. 
In the Collected Sutras, 43 the following analogy is presented by the 
Buddha: "If sightless people were gathered together in an empty valley 
and tried to find their way into town, they would not be able to discover 
it and would wander around aimlessly. But if one person with sight were 
to accompany them, they could easily reach the town." In the same way, 
like sightless people, the five perfections on their own are limited; they 
can lead only to temporary well-being and prosperity, but not to full 
awakening. But just as one person with sight can lead a large crowd of 
blind people to their destination, the sixth perfection joined with the 
other five causes them to become an effective means for the achieve­
ment of enlightenment. In the same way, the great Brahmin Saraha indi­
cates that these practices alone will not lead to awakening unless they are 
joined with the practice of mahamudra. 
Many of us have experienced this in our practice. Students have 
come to me and said that they are very interested in and devoted to the 
practice of meditation, that they are diligent and really trying, but do 
·not seem to be making progress and have become dissatisfied. When 
they say there is no improvement, the reason may be that their medi­
tation needs to be supplemented with the accumulation of merit. For 
example, in the context ofVajrayana practice, guru yoga and suppli­
cation are the basis for meditation. With our body, we can perform 
prostrations and circumambulation to accumulate merit. With our 
speech, we can do liturgical practice and mantra repetition. With our 
mind, we can meditate on compassion. With our wealth we can engage 
in acts of generosity. 
All of these activities will help our meditation practice to progress. 
Since these virtuous deeds are combined with the practice of medita­
tion, they will not just lead to a temporary benefit, which occurs with· 
PATH MAHAMUDRA ·g5 
most ordinary acts of defiled virtue, 44 but help us to move along the 
path to awakening. 
In sum, Saraha is not saying that the path of means or the accumula­
tion of merit is not useful. Rather, he is demonstrating its validity by 
showing that it must be combined with the realization of mahamudra. 
THE INCORRECT PRACTICE OF INNER HEAT 
24. Some make the firelight burn and bring it to their fontanel; 
With their tongue they enjoy union with the smaller one. 
This binds them up and makes them thoroughly disturbed. 
Swayed by pride, they call themselves yogis. 
Here, Saraha describes the incorrect practice of inner heat that is more 
characteristic of non-Buddhist traditions. This physical technique creates 
the blazing of fire from the abdomen, which causes the subtle drops to 
descend from the top of one's head and land on one's tongue, produc­
ing a state of great pleasure. 45 However, if this is not motivated by the 
wish to realize mahamudra and not combined with its practice, the expe­
rience of the pleasure of inner heat alone will only lead to attachment to 
that bliss. 
Meditation practice should create something more than mere attach­
ment to such experiences, and the verse describes the negative result of 
such techniques: The practitioners become thoroughly disturbed and 
obsessed with an attachment, which they have created for this experi­
ence. Not only do they become obsessed, they also develop pride, 
because they think that their experience is very special and that it allows 
them to call themselves yogis. But without recognizing their mind's 
nature, they are unfit to be called yogis and have nothing to be proud o£ 
86 A SONG FOR THE KING 
MISTAKING SELF-AWARENESS 
25. An experience of self-awareness, a mere name, they display with a 
proud intellect. 
"Whatever binds, that itselfliberates," so they say. 
Not knowing how to appraise a gem, the ignorant 
Single out the color green to say that some trinket is an emerald. 
This verse addresses the topic of self-awareness.46 The term is used in 
several different contexts in Buddhism. In the study of valid cognition 
and in some Middle Way school contexts, it is said that self-awareness 
exists, meaning that one can know what one is experiencing. In other 
presentations of the Middle Way, it is said that self-awareness is impos­
sible: the mind being aware of itself resembles a sword being able to cut 
itself or a strong man being able to lift himself. But in mahamudra and 
similar teachings, the term self-awareness means something else. It refers 
to self-aware wisdom 47 that is nondual. So we seem to have three con­
texts for this term; first, that of valid cognition, where essentially self­
awareness seems to be a relative truth; second, where it appears to be 
refuted as an ultimate truth; and third, in the teachings of mahamudra, 
where it is asserted to be the pinnacle of the view. At first glance these 
three presentations may seem to be in conflict, but in fact they are not. 
For example, when we are practicing tranquility meditation, culti­
vating mindfulness and alertness, at some point we become aware that 
our mind is at rest. This awareness is merely awareness of what our mind 
is experiencing at that moment. This is a valid experience for tranquil­
ity meditation, but in itself, it is not of much use in the practice of 
insight meditation. 
The self-aware wisdom that is sought in the practice of insight is dif­
ferent. It is not merely the mind's ability to know what it is experienc­
ing; rather, it is the mind actually recognizing and directly experiencing 
PATH MAHAMUDRA 87 
its own nature. Now that nature, as mentioned earlier, is emptiness, but 
it is not just emptiness, because the mind also has the ability to cognize. 
So the experience is of the unity of cognitive lucidity and emptiness, 
which is sometimes called the unity of expanse and wisdom. This recog­
nition and experience is entirely different from the mind being aware of 
what it is experiencing, such as being at rest or moving. 
The self-awareness in terms of valid cognition is simply the capacity 
of any cognition to experience itself in the most basic sense. According 
to valid cognition, each of the eight consciousnesses (the five sensory 
consciousnesses, the mental consciousness, the afflicted consciousness, 
and the alaya consciousness) has this ability to be self-aware, which is 
simply the fact that a consciousness is not concealed from itself. For 
example, this means that you know what has arisen in your mind with­
out having to ask anyone else or without having to deduce it; you just 
experience it. This is what self-awareness means in the basic context of 
valid cognition. You know what you see with your eye consciousness. 
However, you do not know what arises in the minds of others or what 
they see, so you have to ask them what they are thinking. By contrast, 
you know what is in your own mind without having to ask yourself 
what you are thinking, and you do not need to follow a process of deduc­
tion to figure it out. This self-awareness is on the mundane level, mean­
ing that it is limited to the world of relative truth. This is not the 
self-aware wisdom spoken of in mahamudra. 
The Middle Way school's presentation of self-awareness is given, for 
example, in Candrak:i:rti's Entering the Middle way and Samideva's Guide 
to the Bodhisattva's way of Life, both of which contain refutations of self­
awareness. But the self-awareness refuted in these texts is one that can­
not possibly exist. Further, it is not the self-awareness described in texts 
on valid cognition, nor is it the self-aware wisdom discussed in the 
mahamudra teachings. What is refuted in the Middle Way school is self­
awareness in the sense of the mind being able to see itself as an object 
88 A SONG FOR THE KING 
that is other to itself. This argument negates a self-awareness that would 
arise from having the duality of a separate subject and object. This kind 
of self-awareness is refuted using analogies such as the impossibility of a 
sword cutting itself. 
Now this is very different from the self-aware wisdom of mahamudra 
that is free of subject and object. This self-aware wisdom of mahamudra 
is not the mind seeing itself as an object of perception that would be a 
solid or substantial thing. In the practice of cutting through the ego 
(Tib. cho) we say, "Homage co the Great Mother Prajfiaparamita, who 
is the experience of self-aware wisdom." This means that self-aware wis­
dom occurs when the mind sees its own primordial freedom from sam­
saric or substantial existence: the mind sees its own nature, which from 
the very beginning is free. This freedom from existence is not a noth­
ingness or a voidness, because cognitive lucidity is present at the same 
time. Since mind's nature has this inherent wisdom, it can cognize and 
therefore it can cognize itself. In that this nature knows itself, it is with­
out the duality of viewer and viewed. This is the self-awareness spoken 
of in mahamudra. 
The verse describes the situation of someone who has an experience 
of self-awareness and taking it to be self-aware wisdom recognizing the 
true nature of the mind, proudly explains this experience to others. It 
could have been an experience of ordinary self-awareness on the level of 
relative truth as described in valid cognition, or it could be a mistaken 
view of the existence of self-awareness that is refuted in the Middle Way 
school. In either case, it is not the true experience of self-aware wisdom. 
Making the mistake of taking simple awareness of your mind f-or the 
experience of the mind's nature leads you to assume that this alone will 
liberate you. When speaking to others you might say, "Whatever binds, 
that itself liberates." 
The distinction the practitioner fails to make is that the self-aware 
wisdom described in mahamudra is not merely the experience of the 
PATH MAHAMUDRA 89 
mind as it normally is. It is the recognition of the mind's true nature. The 
simple experience of the mind is the self-awareness described in valid 
cognition. But the recognition of the mind's nature is seeing or experi­
encing the mind's emptiness and at the same time, experiencing the 
mind's cognitive lucidity, inseparable from that emptiness. Self-aware 
wisdom is the wisdom of the direct experience of emptiness and lucid­
ity. Experiencing the unity of emptiness and lucidity will liberate you, 
.but merely being aware of your mind will not. 
The analogy for mistaking mere self-awareness for self-aware wisdom 
is mistaking a green trinket for 'an emerald. What they have in common 
is the color green, just as what self-awareness and self-aware wisdom 
have in common is self-awareness. Aside from the color, there is a great 
difference between a trinket and an emerald. Mistaking one for the other 
simply means that you do not know what the characteristics of an emer­
ald are. In the same way, when you mistake self-awareness for self-aware 
wisdom, it means that you do not know what the characteristics of self­
aware wisdom are. 
MISTAKING PASSING EXPERIENCE FOR REALIZATION 
26. This is bringing brass to mind as gold. 
You think carrying this experience onto the path will accomplish 
the ultimate. 
That is like being attached to the bliss of a dream. 
You claim that the aggregates are impermanent and bliss is 
permanent? 
This verse is concerned with attachment t!' minor or temporary expe­
riences. The analogy presented here is the mistaking of brass for gold, 
which resembles the previous analogy of mistaking a green trinket for 
an emerald because of their similar color. In the same way, you might 
90 A SONG FOR THE KING 
mistake brass for gold. If you have recognized gold as gold, it is very 
beneficial. But if you mistake brass for gold, you merely become con­
fused. When you are practicing meditation, if you mistake a temporary 
experience for a state of attainment, you are deceived in a similar way. 
Just as brass does not have the value of gold, temporary experiences do 
not have the value of true realization. 
; 
It is normal and healthy for temporary experiences to arise from time 
to time, whether you are practicing tranquility or insight meditation. 
But these experiences have no great value in and of themselves. There­
fore it is said, "Temporary experiences are like mist; they will vanish." It 
is also said, "If you have become attached to positive experiences, such 
[ 
as bliss, lucidity, and nonconceptuality, you lack the view." Experiences 
can sometimes be very positive, like the three just mentioned. But if 
you are caught by these passing experiences and think they should be 
maintained, you have lost the view. Why? Because having these experi­
ences is not the purpose of meditation. The point of meditation is to rec­
ognize the nature of the mind. Therefore, the second line of this verse 
states that holding on to such experiences will not help you, because 
you cannot accomplish the ultimate aim of meditation. 
For example, when Gampopa was studying under the supervision of 
Milarepa, he had many different experiences and visions because he was 
working with the subtle channels and winds. Sometimes Gampopa saw 
the mandalas of various deities before him; at other times the place where 
he was practicing seemed to be engulfed in utter darkness. Gampopa 
thought, "Since my guru is like the Buddha, I must surely ask him about 
my experiences, both the good and the bad ones." Also during this time 
Gampopa was having a lot of very strange and vivid dreams. When he 
asked Milarepa about them, Milarepa replied, "You are a great teacher of 
the Kadampa and you must have heard and studied the Buddha's teach­
ings extensively. Do you not remember that the Buddha said that dreams 
are merely illusions, that in fact dreams exemplify the state of illusion? 
PATH MAHAMUDRA 9I 
Was the Buddha joking when he said this?" Milarepa went on to explain, 
"When we meditate, many new experiences arise in our mind, because 
we are working with our mind in a new way. There is no reason to be 
elated by pleasant experiences or depressed by unpleasant ones." 
Then Milarepa gave an example: if you are looking at the moon and 
press your eyes with your fingers, you will see two moons. Seeing this, 
some might think, "Well, most people see one moon and I see two 
moons, so I must be special," and so they develop a sense of pride. But 
there is no reason to be proud of simply pressing your eyes with your 
fingers. Upon seeing two moons others might think, "Most people see 
one moon and I see two, so there must be something terribly wrong 
with me." But in fact, there is nothing wrong; you were just pressing 
your eyes. This is the analogy that Milarepa used to explain how we 
should relate to the experiences in meditation. 
This verse gives a second analogy for attachment to temporary med­
itation experiences by comparing them to a dream. If we are attached to 
something in a dream, it obviously is not going to last, because the 
dream state is so impermanent. You could say that the pleasure experi­
enced in a dream has even less value, because it is even shorter and less 
stable than the pleasure experienced in the waking state. Further, the 
state of dreaming is one of added confusion, because these images in a 
dream come from the confused images of phenomena we experience in 
our waking life. It is, therefore, of no use to try to hold on to something 
that happened in a dream. In the same way, when we practice medita­
tion, various experiences will arise and it is important not to fixate on 
them or become attached. 
For example, a positive experience might occur in our meditation. 
Afterward, we reflect upon it and think, "I had a good experience." But 
in thinking of it as a good experience, we create the desire for this tem­
porary experience to reoccur. If the next day during practice it does not 
reoccur, we are automatically disappointed. There is nothing wrong with 
92 A SONG FOR THE KHIG 
the experience, which is good, but it is simply an indication that we are 
practicing. We should not try to prolong it or to hope that it will reoc­
cur, because it has no value in and of itself. When an experience arises, 
simply continue to practice meditation as before. If an experience stops 
arising, just continue to practice meditation as before. Becoming 
attached to any type of meditation-experiences, visions, dreams, what­
ever-will bind you. Do not regard these things as having a'Ily particu­
lar positive or negative value or judge them as good or bad. They are just 
appearances within the mind, which do not justify desire or fear. 
Having the expectation that the meditation experience will last is set­
ting yourself up for disappointment, or as it says in the fourth line: "You 
claim that the aggregates are impermanent and bliss is permanent?" In 
other words, you know that the aggregates are impermanent and yet 
you expect the bliss experienced by these impermanent aggregates to be 
permanent and outlast them. The meditative state that produces the 
particular _experience is impermanent, and therefore the experience is 
impermanent. In the same way, you cannot expect the product of med­
itation-a state of bliss that is grounded in a certain set of aggregates­
to outlast those very aggregates, which are changing moment to 
moment. 
ABANDONING CONFUSION ABOUT E YAM 
2 7. The letters E Vtzm make themselves understood. 48 
By classifying four moments, the four seals are set out. 
Some claim that through experiences, spontaneous presence 
appears. 
Do not be like the one attached to the mirror's reflection. 
The seventh mistake is to become attached to spontaneous presence. 
This is expressed in symbolic terms, which are particular to the Vajrayana 
PATH MAHAMUDRA 93 
and which explain the unity of emptiness and wisdom, or the unity of 
wisdom and method. The symbol for this unity is the word E ~m: E 
represents emptiness and the unborn expanse, while ~m represents wis­
dom and also method. Together these two represent the true nature, 
which is, on the one hand, emptiness and, on the other hand, sponta­
neously present, luminous clarity. The mistaken path pointed out in this 
verse is thinking that the experience of doing the practice of the subtle 
channels, winds, and drops by itself is the ultimate E ~m. These prac­
tices are important and helpful for the ultimate realization of 
mahamudra. However, as explained earlier in the text, if these methods 
are not combined with the realization of mahamudra, or if we become 
attached to the experience of these methods, they become an obstacle to 
achieving enlightenment. 
Verse 27 mentions the four seals or mudras. To understand what 
Saraha is going to say about the four seals, we need to understand a set 
of four symbols and another set of four seals. The four symbols are 
aspects or stages of the practice and the realization of mahamudra. They 
are unique to Saraha's presentation of mahamudra in his cycle of three 
songs, to which A Song for the King belongs. The four symbols are: mind­
fulness, nonminding, the unborn, and beyond the intellect. 
The first symbol is mindfulness, which refers to the proper cultivation 
of the faculty of mindfulness, or recollection, and its attendant faculty 
of alertness, which reins in distraction. 49 This is practiced as a method for 
pacifying the mind. Here, however, it does not just refer to tranquility 
meditation, because it also includes certainty about the illusory nature 
of phenomenon. This will be explained in detail later. 
The second symbol is nonminding. Through the practice of mindful­
ness and alertness, the mind has come to rest, and then we go beyond this 
mere resting. Due to the heightening of the mind's innate cognitive lucid­
ity, the mind is able to recognize the emptiness of mindfulness itsel£5° 
Through this realization, we achieve the third symbol, which is the 
94 A SONG FOR THE KING 
unborn. This aspect is the recognition that all dharmas are empty and 
therefore are without any true arising-they are unborn. Finally, when 
realizing this third symbol, we achieve the fourth symbol, which is to 
experience directly the dharmadhatu (the expanse of all phenomena), 
completely free of any intellectual contrivance or fabrication. This fourth 
symbol is therefore called beyond the intellect. 
These four symbols can be correlated with the four joys and the four 
seals. The four seals are explained in this verse in two ways. The first 
way shows how they should be known in a correct understanding of 
ultimate truth. Then, indicating a second way, Saraha will return to 
them and criticize a misunderstanding of the four seals. 
To correlate these four symbols with the four joys, we begin with an 
ordinary state that lacks mindfulness and alertness; for this reason, we ate 
afflicted by the disturbing emotions. This is a state of misery. Then, 
through the instructions of the guru, we reach the first stage of mind­
fulness, pacifying our mind and realizing the illusory nature of phe­
nomena. This experience results in the joy of the first stage. When we 
have reached the second stage, nonminding, we realize that both mind­
fulness and the nature of mind are empty. The experience of this free­
dom brings about a second kind of joy, known as supreme joy, which is 
stronger than the first. 
When we reach the third stage, the unborn, we see that mindfulness, 
nonminding, and indeed all phenomena are unborn. This produces a 
much greater joy known as without joy, which means a joy so great that 
there is no longer any attachment to it. Finally, when we realize that 
mindfulness, nonminding, and the unborn nature can only be realized 
in a state beyond the intellect (Saraha's fourth symbol), then the experi­
ence of the fourth joy arises, which is known as coemergent joy. If the 
practices of the subtle winds and channels are done without the recog­
nition of the mind's nature, one will experience these four joys as mere 
physical sensations. 
PATH MAHAMUDRA 95 
Now we can correlate these four joys and the four symbols, or stages, 
of Saraha with the four seals. At the first stage of mindfulness, we see all 
relative truths or phenome.l).a as they are and experience the first joy. 
This results in the first seal, the dharma-mudra, or seal of dharmas, 
which mean "phenomena" in this context. At the second stage, non­
minding, which is also supreme joy, we see the emptiness of mind's 
nature. This is the jiiana-mudra, or wisdom seal. In the third stage, the 
unborn, we see that both mindfulness and nonminding are unborn and 
thereby achieve the joy that is without attachment to joy. This is the 
samaya-mudra, or commitment seal. And finally, when we realize that 
all these previous three stages are by nature beyond the intellect, we 
achieve ,:::oemergent joy. This is the maha-mudra, or the great seal. Here, 
the term seal is understood as the correct realization of ultimate truth. 
Saraha affirms that one needs to realize these four joys and four seals, 
which are the true meaning of E ~m. 
It is important to note that these terms, particularly the four joys and 
the four seals, are also applied to the physical and mental sensations that 
arise during the practices of the subtle channels, winds, and drops. The 
physical and cognitive sensations experienced at this time are also called 
joy, supreme joy, without joy, and coemergent joy. And sometimes the 
terminology of the four seals-the dharma seal, the wisdom seal, the 
samaya seal, and the great seal-are applied to results of these practices 
of the path of method. 
Saraha criticizes the use of this terminology when·· it is applied merely 
to the sensations that arise from the practices of the c;hannels, winds, and 
drops. If we assume that we have experienced the fourth joy and thereby 
conclude we have realized coemergent wisdom, we are mistaken. If we 
actually do succeed in realizing coemergent wisdom through the prac­
tices of the subtle channels, winds, and drops, that, of course, is fine 
and these practices have assumed their proper function. But the simple 
experience of the sensation of these four joys alone does not constitute 
96 A SONG FOR THE KING 
the realization of coemergent wisdom. Saraha states that confusing the 
mere experience of the sensation of what is commonly called coemergent 
joy with the true realization of coemergent wisdom is like confusing the 
mere reflection in a mirror for the real thing: "Do not be like the one 
attached to the mirror's reflection." As before, Saraha is not arguing 
about the validiry of using the subtle channels, winds, and drops as 
methods. But he is saying that if they are not used to bring realization 
of mahamudra, then all that they lead to is something that does not 
really perform any true function or have any true value. 
This completes the first seven of the eight verses concerned with 
pointing out mistaken paths. These seven verses are mainly criticizing 
two things. One is the mistaken perception that the path of method 
alone is sufficient to bring about realization of the ultimate. The other 
is becoming attached to the wisdom of hearing and reflection. The prob­
lem with these two mistakes is that they prevent us from entering the 
authentic path. So attachment to the wisdom of hearing and reflection 
or to the experience arising from the techniques on the path of method 
can be an obstacle. This is not to say that the wisdom of hearing and 
reflection or the experience of the path of method are themselves obsta­
cles. The wisdom of hearing and reflection can be very helpful, but if you 
become attached to them, they becoiJ;le an impediment. In both cases of 
attachment to wisdom or method, we are prevented from realizing ulti­
mate truth. 
MISTAKING THE RELATIVE TRUTH 
28. Not understanding, the deer runs 
In confusion after the water's mirage. 
Likewise, the ignorant cannot evade thirst, and die. 
Claiming it is ultimate, some take up bliss. 
PATH MAHAMUDRA 97 
This verse summarizes what is wrong with a mistaken path by using the 
analogy of a deer chasing after a mirage of water. The deer seeks to 
quench its thirst but misapprehends the shimmering mirage for water. 
The deer's thirst, of course, is not relieved, and it remains dissatisfied and 
suffering additionally from its disappointment. In the same way, if we 
become attached tO the path of means or the wisdom of hearing and 
reflection as ends in themselves, we prevent them from serving their true 
function, which is to lead us toward the realization of ultimate truth. 
Like the deer that remains thirsty, we remain in suffering and do not find 
true realization. Therefore, it says in the fourth line of the verse: "Claim­
ing it is ultimate, some take up bliss." Thinking that the experience of 
the bliss, the pleasure of the path of method, is ultimate, they become 
attached to it. 
Gampopa, whose tradition we follow, said that we should combine 
hearing, reflection, and meditation. This means that we should com­
bine our study with the practice of mahamudra meditation, both dur­
ing meditation sessions and in postmeditation. In this way, our 
understanding is not divorced from practical experience. 
In the same way, we engage in both practices of the path of means: the 
generation stage of yidam practice and the completion stage. These are 
very important and useful, but they need to be practiced in a way that is 
not divorced from the mahamudra experience of the mind's nature. Even 
in postmeditation, we need to combine everything with the practice of 
mahamudra, whether we are engaging in physical acts of virtue, such as 
prostration and circumambulation, or in verbal acts such as liturgical 
practice and mantra repetition, or in mental acts such as the cultivation 
of love and compassion for others. To practice all the techniques of the 
path of method together with mahamudra is best. If not, at least we 
should try to practice in a way that is not devoid of mahamudra experi­
ence. In that way we avoid the eight errors that Saraha has pointed our 
in these eight verses and become capable of pursuing an authentic path. 
98 A SONG FOR THE KING 
The Authentic Path of Mahamudra 
THE fOUR SYMBOLS IN BRIEF 
29. The relative truth refers to mindfulness; nonminding 
Points to those mental states when the mind is released from 
mindfulness. 
When completely transformed, this is the supreme of the supreme. 
The result is the genuine supreme. Friends, you should know these. 
With this verse Saraha begins the second part of the path of mahamudra, 
which is the presentation of the genuine path. As mentioned earlier, his 
cycle of three songs presents the authentic path using the unique set of 
terms called the four symbols of instruction. An overview of these four 
symbols is given in verse 29. 
The first symbol is mindfulness, or recollection. When we start to 
practice, our mind is filled with thoughts, which disturb it like waves on 
the surface of water. The Third Karmapa, Rangjung Dorje, in his Aspi­
ration Prayer ofMahtimudrti, wrote: "May the waves of coarse and subtle 
thoughts be pacified in their own place, and may the river of mind come 
to rest without movement." How do we pacifY these waves of thought? 
How do we bring our mind to rest? We do this through the application 
of two faculties of the mind: mindfulness and alertness. When mindful­
ness is active and keeping the mind directed toward the focus of medita­
tion, alertness will automatically be present and signaling when the mind 
strays. By the same token, when one loses mindfulness, alertness disap­
pears. So the single most important thing in the beginning of meditation 
practice is mindfulness. To emphasize this, Santideva wrote in A Guide to 
the Bodhisattva's 'Way of Life: "With joined palms I pray to all practition­
ers to rely upon mindfulness, which alone can calm the wild mind." Here, 
in this practice, we are mainly recollecting the illusory nature of phe­
nomena; therefore, it is a recollection of relative truth. 
PATH MAHAMUDRA 99 
The second symbol is nonminding. Through the practice of mind­
fulness, we develop a state of mental stability and stillness. This is merely 
a state of tranquility and not the recognition of the mind's true nature. 
Therefore, we need to go "further and practice the second symbol, which 
is nonminding. This does not mean that we lose the faculty of mind­
fulness; rather, it means seeing the nature of the mind, seeing the empti­
ness of even mindfulness itself. This is referred to in Rangjung Dorje's 
Aspiration Prayer of Mahiimudrii: "By looking again and again at the 
nature of mind which cannot be looked at, one clearly sees the meaning 
of what cannot be seen." So the second symbol is the samadhi of insight, 
or insight meditation. This second symbol arises when thoughts have 
been pacified through mindfulness and we begin to see the mind's nature 
beyond elaboration. 
This awareness is expanded further until we not only recognize the 
nature of our mind but also recognize this nature to be the true nature 
of all phenomena. In short, we see that they are all unborn and without 
true arising. This is the third symbol. In the verse it states, "When com­
pletely transformed, this is the supreme of the supreme." Previously, we 
had recognized the mind as beyond elaboration, and now "the supreme 
of the supreme" refers to the time when that realization becomes so vast 
in scope that it is all-pervasive. We realize directly that this unborn qual­
ity is not limited to the nature of mind but belongs to ~e nature of all 
phenomena. This is how we recognize that all phenomena are unborn, 
which leads in turn to the fourth symbol, beyond the intellect. This is 
referred to in the fourth line, which states, "The result is the genuine 
supreme." The genuine supreme is the complete realization, beyond the 
intellect, of the nature of all phenomena. It is these four symbols of the 
authentic path that Saraha says we should know: mindfulness, non­
minding, the unborn, and beyond the intellect. 
IOO A SONG FOR THE KING 
THE SYMBOLS, JOYS, SEALS, AND SAMADHIS 
2 3 4 
Saraha's Four Symbols mindfulness nonminding the unborn beyond the 
intellect 
The Four Joys joy supreme joy without joy coemergent 
joy 
The Four Seals (Mudra) Dharma seal wisdom seal samaya seal great seal 
The Four Samadhis samadhi of samadhi of heroic vajralike 
illusion-like the lion's play samadhi samadhi 
phenomena 
In a more detailed explanation of his four symbols, Saraha identifies 
them with the four one-pointed meditative concentrations or samadhis 
described by the Buddha in the sutras. (See table above.) The four 
samadhis are the samadhi of illusion-like phenomena, the samadhi of the 
lion's play, the heroic samadhi, and the vajralike samadhi. The first, the 
samadhi of illusion-like phenomena, refers to the first stage of mindful­
ness, which is seeing the illusory nature of relative truth. The second 
symbol is nonminding. At that point, we further see that relative appear­
ances have no true existence, that they are mere play OJi. display. In this 
way, we achieve the samadhi of the lion's play. The third symbol, the 
unborn, is the achievement of the state beyond fear, because we recog­
nize the unborn nature of all things, and therefore it is the culmination 
of the heroic samadhi. And the fourth symbol, the realization of that 
which is beyond the intellect, is indestructible realization; it is therefore 
the result of vajralike samadhi. This concludes a brief explanation of 
how the four symbols are related to the four samadhis. 51 
In the next four verses, Saraha will explain these four samadhis in 
detail. However, when he does so, he does not follow the order that he 
has previously used (mindfulness, nonminding, the unborn, and beyond 
the intellect). Instead Saraha starts with nonminding, then returns to 
mindfulness, followed by the unborn, and finally, beyond the intellect. 
PATH MAHAMUDRA IOI 
It could be that he presents nonminding in the beginning so that we do 
not merely cultivate a state of tranquiliry meditation. Before beginning 
the proper practice of mindfulness, we have become somewhat familiar 
with the mind's nature through the presentation of nonminding. Hav­
ing gained a sense of what it is, we are able to stabilize this through the 
subsequent practice of mindfulness. 
THE SECOND SYMBOL: NONMINDING 
30. The mind released from mindfulness engages in samadhi. 
It is completely purified of the afflictions. 
As the utpala born from a swamp is not stained by it, 
So the mind itself is not affected by the faults arising from 
samsara nor by the qualities found in the Victorious One. 
In verse 30, Saraha presents the practice of nonminding, which is 
identified with the samadhi of the lion's play. When we begin to prac­
tice tranquiliry on the path of mahamudra, we start with the recogni­
tion of the mind's nature. Because of this, the practice of meditation is 
not devoid of wisdom; from the very beginning, it is endowed with the 
wisdom that comes from meditation. Nonminding resembles the behav­
ior or play of a lion, because just as a lion terrifies and overpowers all 
other wild animals, nonminding (meaning here the recognition of the 
mind's nature) overpowers and defeats all mental afflictions. 
In the first line, "The mind released from mindfulness engages in 
samadhi," Saraha affirms that we begin with the faculry of mindfulness. 
We are released from it because we have recognized the nature of mind, 
which brings freedom from the disturbing emotions. The mind is com­
pletely purified. This does not mean, however, that one solid thing is 
overpowering another solid thing. Nonminding is a deep insight into 
the nonexistence of the disturbing emotions, and this is what conquers 
102 A SONG FOR THE KING 
them. In the next two lines, Saraha gives an analogy to illustrate this 
meaning: "As the utpala born from a swamp is not stained by it, so the 
mind itself is not affected by the faults arising from samsara nor by the 
qualities found in the Victorious One." The utpala is a blue lotus flower, 
which grows in the mud. In sustaining its purity, regardless of the nature 
of its environment, the utpala resembles nonminding or insight into the 
nature of mind. 
THE FIRS·T SYMBOL: THE PRACTICE OF MINDFULNESS 
31. Mindfulness also sees with certainty that all things are like an 
illusion. 
Transcending the world, take this moment into your mind and 
rest evenly in meditation. 
Those whose minds recognize the teaching bind up ignorance. 
Self-arising and inconceivable, wisdom naturally abides within. 
As we saw in the brief presentation, nonminding is presented first and 
mindfulness second, because even though we have gained some insight 
.into the mind's nature, that experience cannot simply be left as it is or 
abandoned; it has to be cuhivated. Dakpo Tashi Namgyal wrote, "The 
cultivation of this insight requires sharp and lucid mindfulness and alert­
ness." After initially recognizing the mind's nature, which is beyond 
mindfulness, we still need to apply the faculty of mindfulness to stabi­
lize that recognition. This is probably the reason Saraha has presented 
nonminding first and then the practice of mindfulness. Due to this 
change in order, the faculty of mindfulness here is different. Since it suc­
ceeds the recognition of nonminding, it is free of fixation and therefore 
sees the illusory nature of things. The first line of the verse states: "Mind­
fulness also sees with certainty that all things are like an illusion." Of the 
PATH MAHAMUDRA 103 
four types of samadhi, it is the first, the samadhi of illusion-like phe­
nomena, that is relevant here. 
Having recognized the nature of the mind, or mahamudra, we must 
take the next step and stabilize that state of recognition. Progress in the 
practice depends upon cultivating faculties of mindfulness and alert­
ness, which are lucid and sharp. If we do not maintain them, or if they 
are not intense enough, we will not be able to cut through the under­
current of our thoughts. This undercurrent refers to thoughts that are 
not superficially evident but can persist unnoticed and adulterate our 
meditation. Furthermore, if we get used to allowing these conceptual 
undercurrents to continue, our samadhi will eventually become defec­
tive and this will prevent progress. Maintaining lucid and sharp mind­
fulness and alertness allows for greater progress. 
The reason the practice of mindfulness is correlated with the samadhi 
of illusion-like phenomena is that through practicing nonminding, we 
have recognized the mind's nature. Since this is a basic recognition of 
dharmata, there is no fixation on the reality of the meditative state or the 
faculty of mindfulness that is being cultivated. It is all seen as a magical 
illusion. 
THE THIRD SYMBOL: THE UNBORN 
32. These empty appearances have the nature of clarity; from the 
very first they are unborn. 
They do not arise as an entity with form; discard as well thinking 
they arise in the aspect of form's characteristics. 
Abide continually within the mind itself and practice only deep 
meditation. 
Without thought, rest in this meditation free of mental activity 
and free of flaws. 
104 A SONG FOR THE KING 
The practice of the third symbol, the unborn, is mainly a meditation on 
emptiness. This is a high level of experience and realization, but it is not 
the ultimate realization. For example, followers of the Middle Way school 
study what it means to be empty of self, and this is similar to the realiza­
tion of the unborn. This is followed by the study of what it means to be 
empty of other, or the emptiness of phenomena. It explains th<1-t empti­
ness is not just empty; emptiness is also the spontaneous presence of wis­
dom within each and every being. The emptiness of phenomena and the 
spontaneous presence of wisdom may seem like very high teachings, and 
therefore very distant from our ordinary experience. In mahamudra med­
itatiQn, however, this same sugatagarbha, the seed of enlightenment, is 
presented in such a way that it does not seem distant from our ordinary 
experience. Sugatagarbha is the mind's cognitive lucidity, or the mind's 
innate wisdom, and the seed of all the qualities ofbuddhahood. 
Through the practice of mindfulness and nonminding, we come to 
realize the third symbol, the unborn. This is che realization that all 
appearances from the very beginning have been without birth or true 
arising. It is traditionally said chat mahamudra realization is devoid of 
the three conditions and beyond the four joys. 52 "Without the three con­
ditions" means that mahamudra meditation is independent of the three 
experiences of bliss, cognitive lucidity, and nonconceptuality. Whereas 
most meditative si:ates are dependent upon one or more of these, 
mahamudra is not. While most other meditative states are considered 
conditioned, mahamudra is not. Therefore, mahamudra is unborn from 
the beginning, and so it neither abides nor ceases. 
Furthermore, in referring to empty appearances, the second line states, 
"They do not arise as an entity with form; discard as well thinking they 
arise in the aspect of form's characteristics." Mahamudra has no form. 
When you look directly at your mind, you do not detect any shape or 
color. This means that the mind's nature has no form, and further, that 
PATH MAHAMUDRA 105 
it does not possess any of the characteristics of form or solidity either. In 
this way mahamudra is shown to be unborn. 
What exactly is the unborn nature of phenomena? While in ultimate 
truth nothing truly exists, in relative truth various appearances do arise. If 
we examine these appearances, we will see that their nature is the unity of 
emptiness and appearance. The same is true of experiences within the 
mind, such as meditative states of bliss. If we look at the nature of bliss, 
we will see that it is empty. Since we are experiencing bliss, this is the unity 
of bliss and emptiness. Furthermore, the capacity to recognize, to know, 
or to be aware is characteristic of the unborn mind. If we look :it this 
awareness and see its emptiness, that is the unity of awareness and empti­
ness. Finally, the mind's lucidity is also empty, so there is the unity of 
lucidity and emptiness. These four unities are the meaning of the unborn 
nature: appearance-emptiness, bliss-emptiness, awareness-emptiness, and 
lucidity-emptiness. The instruction here is to rest in just this: '~ide con­
tinually within the mind itself and practice only deep meditation." We do 
this without thought, without mental activity, which means that we rest 
free of any dualistic differentiation between that which is meditating or 
observing and that which is meditated upon. 
When we realize the unborn nature (emptiness), then the cause of 
suffering (the disturbing emotions) and its result (suffering) cease. As a 
result, we are liberated from misery, fear, sadness, regret, and anxiety. 
These are all eradicated, leaving us fearless. For this reason, the samadhi 
realizing the unborn was called the heroic samadhi, because achieving it, 
we are no longer afraid of anything. 
THE FouRTH SYMBOL: BEYOND THE INTELLECT 
33· Intellect, mind, and mental appearances have this very nature. 
All the worlds appearing in their diversity have this very nature. 
106 A SONG FOR THE KING 
All the varieties of the seen and the seer have this very nature. 
Attachment, desire, aversion, and bodhicitta, too, have this very 
nature. 
At the level of the fourth symbol, one realizes that the nature of the 
mind is not only beyond existence but also beyond nonexistence-it is 
completely beyond the intellect. Since this is attained through direct 
experience, it transcends any conceptual apprehension of existence or 
nonexistence and is the direct experience of the true nature just as it is, 
beyond any kind of extreme. It is, therefore, the ultimate samadhi. 
This fourth symbol transcends even the realization of the unborn 
described in the previous verse. It is the vajralike samadhi, or the ulti­
mate samadhi. One passes through various states: (r) thoughts arising in 
the mind are apprehended by mindfulness; (2) mindfulness is dissolved 
into the expanse beyond mindfulness; (3) within that expanse occurs 
the realization of the unborn; (4) and finally even that is transcended, so 
that "Intellect, mind, and mental appearances have this very nature." 
This is what is meant when it is said that this nature, or dharmata, is 
beyond the intellect, beyond mind, and beyond all mental appearances 
while remaining the nature of them all. The third line, "All the varieties 
of the seen and the seer have this very nature," means that though this 
nature is beyond the dualism of seer and seen, all phenomena have this 
nature. This is how to understand the nature that is beyond the intellect. 
The fourth line of this verse states that bodhicitta also has this very 
nature. In general, bodhicitta has two aspects: relative and absolute. Rel­
ative bodhicitta is the wish to protect and alleviate the suffering of all 
beings. In essence, it is compassion that has an aspect of wisdom. This 
verse is speaking of absolute bodhicitta, which recognizes the true nature 
of all things. It also has an aspect of compassion, because the realization 
of the nature of all phenomena spontaneously produces an extraordinary 
compassion for all beings. This compassion is extremely powerful 
PATH MAHAMUDRA 107 
because it is unfabricated. This completes an explanation of the fourth 
symbol, beyond the intellect. 
The next question about the path that needs to be answered is, How 
do we start to practice these four symbols? We start through the grad­
ual cultivation of the wisdom of listening, contemplation, and medita­
tion. Why do we need listening? Although we all possess sugatagarbha, 
or buddha nature, we are unaware of it. Since we do not know it is there, 
we have to be told that all sentient beings including ourselves have 
buddha nature. An analogy for this is presented in the Uttaratantra 
where it explains that our buddha nature, which is basically a synonym 
for the sugatagarbha, is like buried gold. Imagine that a large piece of 
gold was buried underground, covered with dirt and refuse of all kinds. 
The gold itself would not change at all, eyen though a hundred or a 
thousand years passed. Nevertheless, no one would take advantage of it 
because it was hidden. Eventually, a poor person comes along and builds 
his shack directly over the gold. The gold could alleviate his poverty, but 
since he does not know it is there in the first place, he makes no use of 
the gold and suffers. A person with extrasensory perception comes along, 
observes the situation, and kindly and compassionately tells the poor 
person, "You know, there is a very large piece of gold directly under your 
shack. Why don't you remove it and take care of all your needs?" The 
poor man hearing this does s.o and is freed from the suffering of poverty. 
The function of listening is very much like that. You come to know the 
gold of buddha nature within. 
Listening, Contemplation, and Meditation 
34· A lamp is lit in the darkness of ignorance. 
While you differentiate mental categories, 
You discard the mind's flaws. 
Reflect upon the nature of nonattachment. 
108 A SONG FOR THE KING 
Saraha advises that when we begin to practice the path of the four sym­
bols, we should do so gradually through generating the wisdom of lis­
tening, contemplating, and meditating. He gives this advice because we 
are ordinary beings at the very beginning of the path and do not under­
stand the nature of our mind. In order to be able to entertain this idea 
and eventually realize it, we must initially encounter either the Buddha's 
teachings or the commentaries on these teachings, which are found in 
many texts and in the practical instructions of the mahasiddhas, such as 
this song of Saraha. Of course, we have the nature of our mind within 
us, but we do not have access to this nature, because we follow our own 
confused projections and bewildered appearances. We are immersed in 
these incorrect thoughts and cannot reverse the bewilderment by our­
selves, since it is our own bewilderment. 
The first line of the verse states: "A lamp is lit in the darkness of 
ignorance." In this analogy, the lamp is the fact that the gold is there, 
that buddha nature exists. This is the beginning of the process of remov­
ing ignorance. Understanding what we have heard is the achievement 
of the wisdom of hearing, and it starts with encountering the Buddha's 
teachings. 
Nevertheless, this initial hearing and the wisdom generated through 
it are not enough. We need to scrutinize and evaluate what has been 
heard. This is the wisdom of contemplation, which generates conceptual 
certainty. The verse states: "While you differentiate mental cate­
gories, ... " which refers to a conceptual state of the mind and this can­
not in itself remove defects or bewilderment, nor can it generate true 
wisdom. Therefore, after the wisdom of contemplation, we need to go 
further and cultivate the wisdom that arises from meditation. Through 
this, the. song states that you will "discard the mind's flaws." It is this 
process of listening, contemplation, and meditation that allows you to 
realize the meaning of the four symbols. 
PATH MAHAMUDRA 109 
An Extensive Explanation of Key Instructions 
NoTHING TO NEGATE OR CoNSTRUCT 
35· There is no negating, no constructing, 
And no apprehending: it is inconceivable. 
The ignorant are bound by mental categories. 
The inseparable, the coemergent, is utterly pure. 
The previous verse was an explanation of the entire process of hearing, 
reflection, and meditation in brief Since the most important of these 
three is the practice of meditation, the next two verses continue .to 
explain it in more detail. 
Verse 35 explains that all we need to do is recognize the mind's nature; 
there is no need to eliminate anything from it, nor is there any need to 
construct some kind of logical reasoning to realize mind's nature. This 
same idea is explained in the Uttaratantra: "There is nothing to be 
removed from this and there is nothing to be added." "There is nothing 
to be removed" means that when we look at our mind's nature, we are 
not attempting to eliminate something from it. There is nothing solid 
or negative that needs to be taken out, or, as the verse says, "There is no 
negating." 
Second, when meditating, we are not attempting to add to or improve 
the mind's nature: there is "no constructing." Since the nature itself is 
beyond the intellect and therefore cannot be conceptually understood, 
or apprehended, this nature is inconceivable. Those who seek for some­
thing to be negated, something to be constructed, something to be 
apprehended, or something to be conceptualized are referred to as "the 
ignorant" because they are bound by these mental' categories. 
Since the nature of the mind is emptiness, there is nothing that needs 
to be removed from it. And since the nature of the mind is not just 
emptine~s, since it is at the same time an inherently present lucidity, 
IIO A SONG FOR THE KING 
there is nothing that needs to be added to it either. The quotation from 
the Uttaratantra continues: "Look perfectly at that which is perfect. If 
it is perfectly seen, you will be perfectly liberated." To look perfectly 
means to see this nature as it is, by looking at it in the right way, free of 
any attempt to get rid of anything or introduce anything, and also free 
of any conceptual stance created by a philosophical outlook. This cor­
rect seeing will bring about liberation. 
What we discover in meditation is not something we can conceive o£ 
It is utterly pure in transcending all such conceptualizations. In sum, 
meditation should be free of all intellectualization. 
MIND Is CLEAR AND UNMOVING 
36. Examining emptiness with the reasoning of one or many, you see 
that it is neither. 
Through mere recognition, living beings are utterly freed. 
Meditate recognizing what is clear and unmoving. 
I apprehend the stable mind to be just that. 
Having recognized the true nature, which is emptiness, we cultivate this 
in meditation, which consists of fostering the continuity of the initial 
recognition. This is described in the third line of the verse: "Meditate 
recognizing what is clear and unmoving." The nature of mind that we 
are meditating on is totally free of any obscurations or instabilities. Even 
so, we can still suffer from the defects of meditation-torpor and excite­
ment-so this line can also be understood to mean that we should med­
itate on emptiness with a mind that is free of both. The instruction to 
"meditate recognizing what is clear ... " indicates that we should meditate 
with a mind that is not dull or lax. When the mind is unclear in this way, 
we need to develop the mind's lucidity, its natural clarity. The instruc­
tion to recognize what is "unmoving" means to meditate with a mind 
PATH MAHAMUDRA III 
that is free of excitement or instability. When the mind is clear but agi­
tated, we need to calm down and reduce the movement of the mind. 
Saraha states that by meditating on the nature of mind in this way, "I 
apprehend the stable mind to be just that." Through meditating with a 
mind that is free of the .defects of torpor and excitement , we also will 
apprehend the nature just as it is, free of all defects and therefore clear 
and unmoving. 
Questions 
Question: Rinpoche, you stated that practicing the path of method and 
the path of liberation together is the most effective means of practicing. 
I am wondering what you meant by the path of method and why the 
combination is the most effective? 
Rinpoche: In general, it is fine to practice the path of liberation with­
out the path of method. What I was referring to when I said the path of 
method were the methods that have been passed down in the Kagyii 
tradition from Tilopa and Naropa to the present day. In the Kagyi.i tra­
dition, the path of liberation is defined as mahamudra , and the path of 
method refers to the six yo gas of Naropa. However, in this context the 
six yogas of Naropa would also include doing yidam practices, which 
must precede them. 
Marpa the Translator went to India three times. He said of what he 
brought back, "I received Hevajra, the profound tantra, and Cakrasaqt­
vara, the quintessence ." By referring to Cakrasaqtvara as the quintessence, 
it is evident he considered it to be the most profound of these cycles of 
practice. Therefore, since the rime ofMarpa, the Kagyi.i lineage has taken 
that cycle as the basis for practicing the path of method. In fact, the path 
of method has two aspects. When method is emphasized, Cakrasaqtvara 
II2 A SONG FOR THE KING 
is engaged in as the father practice. When wisdom is emphasized, Vajrayo­
gini or Vajravarahi is engaged in as the mother practice. Historically, we 
have tended to emphasize the lineage ofVajrayogini, whose practice has 
two aspects: the generation stage of the Vajrayogini sadhana and the com­
pletion stage of the six yogas ofNaropa. You can also understand the six 
yogas of Naropa as the completion stage of both Vajrayogini and 
Cakrasarrvara. In the Kagyli lineage the corresponding path of libera­
tion would be the practices of tranquility and insight in the context of 
mahamudra. 
Question: Rinpoche, it was said that once you reach the first bodhisattva 
level, there is no falling back. It is also said that you reach the first bodhi­
sattva level when you have had experience of mahamudra. My own expe­
rience has been that the path is very gradual, sometimes you click in 
and sometimes you click out. Sometimes you click out for a long time 
and then come back in again. 
Rinpoche: There is a difference between proceeding through the path to 
enlightenment by means of the profound path of the Vajrayana, or secret 
mantra, and the vast path or" a bodhisattva. For example, we can com­
pare two individuals, both of whom achieved perfect awakening, the 
Buddha and Milarepa. Sakyamuni Buddha gathered the accumulations 
for three innumerable eons and achieved buddhahood. Milarepa 
achieved the state of Vajradhara in one lifetime and one body. What 
they achieved in terms of their wisdom mind and what they realized are 
not different: whatever the Buddha saw, Milarepa saw. Whatever the 
Buddha abandoned, Milarepa abandoned. However, their paths were 
different in the way that their fruition manifested. Because the Buddha 
achieved full awakening through the innumerable eons of practice, when 
he achieved it, his body was adorned with the thirty-two marks and 
eighty signs of physical perfection; his speech was embellished with the 
sixty limbs of melody; and his activity was both perfect and pervasive. 
PATH MAHAMUDRA II3 
Milarepa realized the same thing that the Buddha realized, but because 
of the difference in the merit accumulated, Milarepa's body was not 
adorned with the thirty-two marks and eighty signs, did not possess the 
sixty branches of melody, and his activity was not identical to that of 
Sakyamuni Buddha. The wisdom was the same, but there was a differ­
ence in the manifestation of the result, which is due to the difference in 
the manner of gathering the accumulations or, you could say, in the 
length and stability of the paths. 
When you see the nature of your mind, you are realizing dharmata. 
A first-level bodhisattva realizes dharmata and achieves a state that will 
not revert to a lower level. Although we realize the same nature that is 
realized by a first-level bodhisattva on the vast path of the Mahayana, the 
circumstances, means, or conditions for our realization are different. 
Because we achieved this insight through what is called abrupt intro­
duction, we do not achieve the state of irreversibility the way a bodhi­
sattva would by realizing dharmata. In sum, the nature that is seen by a 
mahamudra practitioner is the same as the nature seen by a first-level 
bodhisattva on the path of the Mahayana, but the qualities that come 
with those insights are different. 

Fruition Mahamudra 5 
A Song for the King has three main sections, presenting the ground, 
the path, and the fruition. We have come to the third, the fruition 
of mahamudra, which in turn has three sections. I will go through these 
three sections briefly, and there is a reason for doing so. The first section 
of the ground must be clearly explained. When we are attempting to 
ascertain the nature of the ground, it is essential that it be properly 
understood, because it is the basis of the path. In the same way, to 
achieve the result, the path must be properly understood so that we can 
correctly proceed along it and avoid mistakes. The fruition is something 
that we either attain or do not attain as a result of the path. It is some­
what simpler to talk about, as it requires less explanation. 
Primordial Wisdom Expands through Bliss 
37. Through attaining the vast land of happiness, 
And through seeing its own nature, mind becomes vast. 
You walk through the land, yet mind's nature is not separate. 
The first of the three topics within the presentation of the fruition is how 
primordial wisdom expands when we attain great bliss. As we have seen, 
if we realize the nature of our mind, we are liberated from samsara. This 
Il5 
II6 A SONG FOR THE KING 
constitutes the perfect accomplishment of benefit for oneself, and it also 
creates the causal condition for the complete accomplishment of benefit 
for others. Due to these two benefits, we experience consummate joy, 
and this joy is also the expansion of wisdom. 
In general, the qualities of a buddha are defined as wisdom, love, and 
ability. Wisdom is twofold: a buddha possesses the wisdom that knows 
the nature of phenomena and the wisdom that knows the variety of phe­
nomena. The wisdom that knows the true nature of phenomena is the 
fact that the buddha directly sees dharmata. At the same time, a buddha 
also sees the individual joys and sufferings of each living being, and this 
is the wisdom of the variety of phenomena. 
Buddhas are not only wise. Through their possession of perfect wis­
dom, they also have perfect loving-kindness for all beings. If the buddhas 
possessed only the two wisdoms and had no ability to benefit others, the 
situation would be quite different. But since they possess both consum­
mate wisdom and perfect loving-kindness, they also possess the perfect 
ability to benefit and protect others. This explanation of the three qual­
ities ofbuddhahood fills out the basic definition of fruition mahamudra. 
All of the sufferings of samsara are due to confused projections or 
confused appearances. When we recognize that these are empty, we erad­
icate both the cause and the result of suffering, and this leads to an expe­
rience of great bliss. The song states, "Through attaining the vast land 
of happiness," which refers to an all-pervasive state of great bliss. 
Through attaining this and "through seeing its own nature, mind 
becomes vast." This experience of a boundless state of great bliss­
although it is in one sense a ground or object of experience-is not sep­
arate from the mind that experiences it; therefore, the mind itself is vast. 
From a relative point of view, we experience this state of great of bliss as 
though it were an environment or a land we are walking through. In 
actuality, however, since this environment or state of great bliss has 
always been the nature of our mind and the nature of all things, we are 
FRUITION MAHAMUDRA II? 
inseparable from it. Therefore, the verse concludes, "Yet mind's nature 
is not separate." 
Delineating the Five Kayas 
38. Coemergent joy is the dharmakaya. The sambhogakaya is 
the seedling of joy 
And superior; the leaves come forth. 
At the time of the path, the dharmakaya does not radiate in 
the ten directions. 
Bliss free of constructs is fruition itsel£ 
The second topic within fruition is delineating the five kayas through the 
dharmakaya's emanation of two form kayas. This leads to an expanded 
layout of the dharmakaya, which accounts for the spontaneous presence 
of the five kayas. The verse begins, "Coemergent joy is the dharmakaya." 
The ultimate result has a variety of qualities, and the distinctions among 
these qualities are the divisions of the various bodies. The primary and 
usual division of the kayas is into the dharmakaya, the sambhogakaya, 
and the nirma!.fakiiya. Of these three, the dharmakaya is the perfect 
accomplishment of benefit for oneself, while the sambhogakaya and 
nirmii.Ifakaya are the perfect accomplishment of benefit for others. In 
his song, Saraha speaks of five different kayas, of which the initial three 
represent aspects or qualities of the dharmakaya: innate wisdom, natu­
ral purity, and great bliss. 
First, it is important to understand the quality of being innate. The 
dharmakaya is not newly acquired at the time of fruition, nor is it some­
thing created by the path. It is the nature of mind from the very begin­
ning. Further, its wisdom transcends the intellect, which operates in a 
dualistic mode of perception. The second quality is the natural purity 
of the dharmakaya, which is given the name sviibhiivikakiiya. From 
n8 A SONG FOR THE KING 
beginningless time, it is essentially pure and has never been stained. The 
third quality reflects the fact that the dharmalci.ya is not a state of noth­
ingness nor is it suffering; it is a state of great bliss, and therefore it is also 
called the body of great bliss, or mahasukhakiiya. In this way, we can 
divide the dhartnalci.ya into its qualities of innate wisdom, natural purity, 
and great bliss, and say there are three kayas, but actually, these three 
bodies are all qualities or aspects of the dharmalci.ya. 
While the dharmakaya of the Buddha realizes dharmata, he displays 
the two form bodies in order to communicate with others. To benefit 
chose with pure perception (the bodhisattvas), the dharmalci.ya displays 
the sambhogakaya. To help ordinary beings, it displays the supreme 
nirm3J;lalci.ya, such as Sakyamuni Buddha. 
To summarize, when we attain coemergenc wisdom and the dharma­
kaya, it does not mean chat the dharmalci.ya is created by our achieve­
ment of coemergent wisdom. It has always been purely present and is 
simply recognized. Since the dharmalci.ya is innate and not newly created, 
it is also called the svabhavikakaya, or essence body, which is the second 
body. The state of dharmalci.ya is the state of coemergent joy, and since 
it is free of all suffering whatsoever, it is also the mahasukhalci.ya, or the 
body of great bliss. Now these three-the dharmakaya, svabhavika­
kaya, and mahasukhalci.ya-can be considered three bodies or they can 
be considered one, the dharmalci.ya. 
The next two kayas, the fourth and fifth, are the form kayas: the sam­
bhogakiiya and the nirmii'!ld-kiiya. The sambhogakaya is "the seedling of 
joy," where "joy'' refers to the state of great bliss, a quality of the dharma­
kaya. The "seedling" emerging from it is the sambhogalci.ya, which is 
"superior" to the nirma9akaya. Why is this so? The sambhogakaya 
appears only to individuals with pure faculties (bodhisattvas), while the 
nirm3J;lalci.ya appears to those who have ordinary faculties and are not 
so pure. The sambhogalci.ya is the initial emanation of the dharmalci.ya, 
as a seedling first appears, and then the nirm3J;lalci.ya emanates as the 
FRUITION MAHAMUORA ll9 
leaves growing from a stalk. This is the brief explanation of the five bod­
ies, which can be summarized into three. 
Benefit for Self and Others Is Nondual 
39· Those staying in that land benefit those living there but are not 
truly existent. 
Nevertheless, there is a need that they stay in that place, benefit­
ing those beings. 
Attached and ultimately not attached are the form kayas; 
Emptiness is inseparable from appearance. 
The third section details the fruition of mahamudra and explains how 
on the level of ultimate truth, the two form bodies, or riipakiiyas, do not 
exist. Ultimately, buddhas and sentient beings have the same nature, 
and so living beings have been buddhas from the very beginning. Fur­
thermore, although buddhas abide as the dharmakaya and display the 
form bodies, these kayas are not distinct from one another. There are no 
riipakayas aside from the dharmakaya, and there is no dharmakaya aside 
from the riipakayas. In this way, the nature of any form that is displayed 
is emptiness, which is the very source of that display. 
The first line states: "Those staying in that land benefit those living 
there but are not truly existent." In ultimate truth, the two form bodies 
that benefit beings have no true or absolute existence. Further, those 
who are benefited by these two form bodies do not have true or ultimate 
existence either. Yet, as the second line states: "Nevertheless, there is a 
need that they stay in that place, benefiting those beings." This is true 
because within the land of relative truth, the presence of the two form 
bodies brings real benefit for living beings. The third line states: 
'~ttached and ultimately not attached are the form kayas." '~ttached" 
here means exhibiting affection for sentient beings and refers to the two 
120 A SONG FOR THE KING 
form kayas. "Nonattached" refers to the dharmakaya, which is in itself 
a state of complete peace. While the two form kayas appear to have dif­
ferent functions within relative truth, in ultimate truth they have no 
existence apart from the dharmakaya. Therefore, the fourth line states: 
"Emptiness is inseparable from appearance." 
The Conclusion: What Is Flawless 
40. It is not like a pig attached to the mire of samsara. 
Once you have realized the flawless mind, what fault is there? 
Anyone who practices like this is not affected by anything. 
Why would this person be bound by flaws? 
The final verse completes the presentation of mahamudra's result with an 
explanation of how the dharmakaya, the fruition of mahamudra, is stain­
less and irreversible. The two form kayas have come to realize this flawless 
nature of mind. Since they are the display of the dharmakaya, and since 
the dharmakaya is the realization of this stainless nature, even though 
they remain active in samsara, the two form bodies are not attached to 
. cyclic existence nor stained by it. Furthermore, the verse says: "Anyone 
who practices like this is not affected by anything." Since this state of 
fruition is irreversible, when we recognize the stainless nature and attain 
the dharmakaya, that realization renders us impervious to any condi­
tions. Therefore, the rhetorical question is asked, "Why would this per­
son be bound by flaws?" Why would you think this individual would be 
bound, since the potential for being fettered has been eradicated? 
This verse brings to a dose the explanation of Saraha's A Song for the 
King. Having made a connection with this text and its explanation, I 
hope that you will be able to emphasize the practice of mahamudra in 
your personal practice, both in meditation and in postmeditation. There 
is nothing more valuable or more important, because this is what will 
FRUITION MAHAMUDRA 121 
lead to the ultimate result of Dharma practice. While you are on the 
path, this practice will dispel adversity. If, for one reason or another, you 
cannot practice with as much diligence as you wish, remember that you 
are still very fortunate and have benefited a great deal from connecting 
with these teachings. Even if you have just heard these teachings and do 
not practice them, you have created a positive tendency and a familiar­
ity with them. This is always beneficial and can never be harmful. At the 
very least, you have once and for all determined that samsara will sooner 
or later come to an end for you. Therefore, please rejoice. 

Appendix 1 
A Song for the King 
by Saraha 
With an Outline and Interpolations from 
The Middle-Length Commentary on 11 Song for the King": 
A Mirror Revealing the Complete Liberation of Mind 
By Karma Trinlepa 
There are three main divisions: 
I. The Introduction 
II. The Main Section 
III. The Conclusion 
I. The Introduction 
A. The meaning of the tide 
I. The translation of the tide 
In the Indian language, the tide is Doha Kosha Nama Tsarya Giti. 
In Tibetan, it is Doha mdzod ces bya ba spyod pa'i glu. [(From) the 
Treasury of Spiritual Songs, A Song ofYogic Conduct.] 
From the four families of languages in India, there is a narurallanguage 
found in the land of coconuts in the south. For this language, the tide 
of the doha, or spiritual song, is "Dwaha Kosha Nama Tsarya Giti," 
which was translated into Tibetan as "[From] the Treasury of Spiritual 
Songs, A Song ofYogic Conduct." It is possible to link the Tibetan and 
123 
124 A SONG FOR THE KING 
the Indian language of the translation. There are many meanings that 
can be applied to the word Dwaha: leaving aside the Tibetan here, in 
Sanskrit this term was given as "Doha." Kosha was translated into 
Tibetan as mdzod[treasury], nama as zhes bya ba [called], tsarya as spyod 
pa [conduct], and giti as glu [song]. 
2. An explanation of the title 
The explanation of A Treasury of Spiritual Songs is similar to the one 
given in ''A Song for the People." Called is a grammatical term that indi­
cates the tide, and ''A Song ofYogic Conduct" comes from the fact that 
it is a song of one who is engaged in yogic activity or conduct, so it is 
[also] said to be a "vajra song." 
B. The homage of the translator 
I prostrate to Noble Mafijufri. 
II. The Main Section 
A. Homage to the deity who delights 
B. A teaching on the condensed essence of the ground, path, and 
fruition 
C. A separate explanation of these [three] 
II.A. Homage to the deity to who delights 
I prostrate to the one who has vanquished the power of the miiras. 
II.B. A teaching on the condensed essence of the ground, path, and 
fruition 
APPENDIX I I25 
1. Three examples show how the ground, though utterly pure, 
appears as delusion. 
2. The examples of water and of light or darkness show how 
[when we are on] the path, wisdom that realizes [emptiness] 
purifies ignorance. 
3· The example of the ocean shows that the fruition is free of 
increase or decrease. 
In the first section here, there are three categories: 
a) The example of waves shows how delusive appearances arise 
within the ground. 
b) The example of the double appearance oflamps, caused by delu­
sion, shows how subject and object appear to be separate. 
c) The example of the lamp and darkness shows how we do not 
realize that primordial wisdom pervades the outside [world]. 
II.B.1.a) The example of waves shows how delusive appearances arise 
within the ground. 
just as when the wind blows 
And still water is turned into moving waves, 
So the appearing Saraha is just one, 
Yet the king creates diverse aspects. [verse 1] 
II.B.1.b) The example of the double appearance of lamps, caused by 
delusion, shows how subject and object appear to be separate. 
The ignorant press their eyes 53 
And see one lamp as two. 
126 A SONG FOR THE KING 
Like this, in [mind's nature} where seer and seen are not two, 
Alas! The mind appears as two things. [verse 2] 
II.B.x.c) The example of the lamp and darkness shows how we do not 
realize that primordial wisdom pervades the outside [world]. 
Though many lamps are lit throughout the house, 
Those with no eyes to see remain in darkness. 
Like this, though spontaneous wisdom is all-pervasive and nearby, 
For the ignorant it is for, for away. [verse 3] 
II.B.2. The examples of water and of light or darkness show how 
[when we are on] the path, wisdom that realizes [emptiness] 
purifies ignorance. 
Though diverse, rivers are one in the ocean. 
Though myriad, lies are overcome by a single truth. 
Though darkness is manifold, 
The rising of a single sun clears it away. [verse 4] 
II.B.3. The example of the ocean shows that the fruition is free of 
increase or decrease. 
a) Setting forth the example 
b) Showing its meaning 
II.B.3.a) Setting forth the example 
Though cloud banks take up water from the ocean 
And jill the earth again [with descending raim}, 
[The ocean} does not decrease; {filling] the whole sky, it [remaim foll]: 
There is no increase or decrease. [verse 5] 
APPENDIX I 127 
II B.3.b) Showing its meaning 
The Victorious Ones are filled with perfect [qualities}, 
Which all have the very same nature-spontaneous presence. 
From [the natural display of the great sphere}, living beings take 
birth and therein cease. 
In relation to this, there is no thing and no nonthing. [verse 6] 
II.C.r. Explaining in detail the phenomena connected with the 
ground 
2. Explaining how to bring the path of mahamudra into our 
expenence 
3· Revealing the fruition 
This first section has four divisions: 
a) On the basis of four incongruent analogies, advice on how to 
give up attachment 
b) On the basis of four congruent analogies, identifying the mean­
ing indicated 
c) On the basis of mingling incongruent and congruent analogies, 
showing the way of indicating the essential nature 
d) Through two incongruent analogies, showing the interdepend­
ent arising of cause and effect 
This first section also has four divisions: 
(1) Through the example of honey in the rock, giving up attach­
ment to conditioned bliss 
128 A SONG FOR THE KING 
Giving up genuine bliss, you take another [path} 
And place your hopes in conditioned bliss. 
Taking nectar in their mouth, [bees} come close, 
But not drinking, they are for from [enjoyment}. [verse 7] 
(2) Through the example of an ignorant expert, discarding attach­
ment to what is to be taken and given up 
Having gone astray, the [animals} do not create suffering; 
On the basis of {this human life], experts create suffering. 
On one hand, [practitioners} come to drink the nectar of space; 
On the other, {experts} remain very attached to objects. [verse 8] 
(3) Through the example of bugs in the midst of excrement, giving 
up attachment to contaminated bliss 
Bugs on excrement are attached to its smell 
And think the pure fragrance of sandalwood foul. 
Likewise, attached to dense [ignorance], the source ofsamsara, 
[Individuals} toss away the transcendence ofsuffering. [verse 9] 
(4) Through the example of water in a hoofprint, giving up attach· 
ment to signs and indications 
[The ignorant think} an oxs hoojprint filled with water [is the 
ocean and look for gems therein], 
Yet [soon} this water will evaporate. Likewise, {those who take 
their passing experiences to be enlightenment} 
Will not {see} the perfect [qualities}. [By developing} a stable and 
perfect mind, 
[The mind clinging to passing experience as} perfect will evaporate. 
[verse ro] 
APPENDIX I 129 
II.C.r.b) On the basis of four congruent analogies, identifying the 
meaning indicated 
This section has four divisions: 
(r) Through the example of something salty becoming sweet, 
showing that once we have realization, there is no fault no mat­
ter how one behaves 
just as the ocean's salty water 
Taken into the clouds turns sweet, 
The stable mind works to benefit others; 
The poison [of] objects turns into healing nectar. [verse n] 
(z) Through the example of thunder and so forth, showing that 
once we have realized what cannot be expressed, though fear 
arises at the mere mention of emptiness, it will mature into 
great bliss 
When [y_ou realize} the ineffable, it is neither suffering [nor bliss]. 
When there is nothing to meditate upon, {wisdom} itself is bliy­
Likewise, though thunder may evoke fear, 
The falling of rain makes harvests ripen. [verse 12] 
(3) Through the example of making no differentiation among the 
three times, showing that appearances and emptiness are not dual 
First [a thing} and in the end [a nonthing-neither is established}; 
likewise, there is nothing other than [these two}. 
There is no [place} to abide in the beginning, middle, or end. 
For those whose minds are obscured by continual concepts, 
Emptiness and compassion are expressed in words. [verse 13] 
130 A SONG FOR THE KING 
(4) Through the example of the bee and the frog, showing the dif­
ference between an expert and an ignorant person when it 
comes to the meaning of samsara and nirvana being inseparable 
just as the nectar dwelling within a flower 
Is known by the bumblebee, 
[The fortunate} toss away neither existence nor nirvana. 
Like them, the ignorant should fully understand. [verse 14] 
II.C.r.c) On the basis of mingling incongruent and congruent analo­
gies, showing the way of indicating the essential nature 
This section has four divisions: 
(1) Through the example of a mirror's reflection, illustrating 
nonattachment to what is not true 
just as an image appears on the mirror's surface, 
[Where} the ignorant look in their lack of knowledge, 
So the mind that throws away the truth 
Relies on many [concepts} that are not true. [verse 15] 
(z) Through the example of a fragrant Hower, showing that medi­
tative concentration is continuous when we have realized the 
wheel of the three kayas 
Though the fragrance of a flower has no form, 
It clearly pervades everywhere. 
Likewise, through the formless nature 
The circles of the mandalas will be known. [verse 16] 
APPENDIX I 131 
(3) Through the example of ice, showing how concepts are con .. 
cretized into something hard and dense when habitual patterns 
of clinging increase 
When a [wintry} wind strikes and stirs up water, 
Though soft, [it} takes the form ofstone. 
When concepts {attempt to} disturb [mind's nature}, where igno­
rance cannot take form, 
Appearances become very dense and solid. [verse 17] 
(4) Through the example ofa jewel and a swamp, showing that 
mind itself is not affected by stains 
The true nature of any state of mind is free of flaws 
And unaffected by the mire of existence and nirvana. 
Even so, if a supreme gem is placed in ·a swamp, 
Its radiance will not be clear. [verse r8] 
II.C.r.d) Through two incongruent analogies, showing the dependent 
arising of cause and effect 
This section has two divisions: 
(r) Through the example of a seedling, showing how the alaya (all­
basis) matures into both samsara and nirvana 
When stupidity is clear, wisdom is unclear. 
When stupidity is clear, suffering is clear. 
Like this, from a seed, a seedling arises; 
With this seedling as a cause, offihoots appear. [verse 19] 
132 A SONG FOR THE KING 
(2) Through the example of self-destruction, showing how experts 
are seen to lapse into the ordinary through their attachment to 
examining and analyzing 
In analyzing the mind [with the reasoning of being] neither one 
nor many, 
[Ifj you discard the clear [aspect of mind's nature}, you will 
descend to the [lower} realms; 
While gazing at [that suffering], you fall into its bottomless pit. 
How could one have anything but compassion for this? [verse 20] 
II.C.2. Explaining how to bring the path of mahamudra into our 
experience 
a) Discarding attachment to mistaken paths 
b) The actual path of mahamudra 
The first section has eight divisions: 
(1) Through the story of Kamarupa, making clear the fault of 
attachment to a karmamudra 
Once totally attached to kissing [and} the bliss [of what follows}, 
The ignorant say that this is indeed the ultimate. 
Having left his house, he stands in front of the gate, 
Soliciting tales ofsemual pleasure. [verse 21] 
(2) Through the example of a royal one, making clear the fault of 
being attached to our body as endowed with skillful means 
For the sake of the winds, [you meditate} on [your body as] an 
empty house, 
APPENDIX I 133 
Practicing artificial [means} in great variety and number. 
From space it falls along with faults. 
Overwhelmed, the yogi faints away. [verse 22] 
(3) Through the example of the Brahmin's burnt offerings, making 
clear the fault of being bound by passing experiences 
just as Brahmins make their burnt offerings 
Of ghee and rice in a blazingjire, 
Know that, from [Haf!l), the quintessence of space, the substance 
[of nectar] produces experience; 
The [passing experience of bliss] is grasped as reality. [verse 23) 
(4) Through the example of another's mind stream, making clear 
the fault of contrived practice 
Some make the firelight burn and [bring it to] their fontanel; 
With their tongue they enjoy union with the smaller one. 
This binds them up and makes them thoroughly disturbed. 
Swayed by pride, they call themselves yogis. [verse 24] 
(5) Through the example of a trinket and a emerald, making clear 
the fault of revealing to others our experience and realization 
[An experience of] self-awareness, [a mere name], they display 
with [a proud} intellect. 
"Whatever binds, that itself liberates, "so they say. 
Not knowing how to appraise a gem, the ignorant 
Single out the color [green] to say that some trinket is an emerald. 
[verse 25] 
I34 A SONG FOR THE KING 
(6) Through the example of confusing brass with gold, making 
clear the fault of clinging to passing experiences as realization 
This is bringing brass to mind as gold. 
{You think] carrying this experience [onto the path} will accom­
plish the ultimate. 
[That is like] being attached to the bliss of a dream. 
You claim that aggregates are impermanent and bliss is permanent? 
[verse 26] 
(y) Through the example of a reflection, making clear the mistake 
of confusing the meaning and the example E Vttm with the 
four seals 
The letters E Vam make themselves understood. 
By classif.Jing [four] moments, the four seals are set out. 
Some claim that through experiences, spontaneous presence 
[appears}. 
[Do not be} like [the one attached] to the mirror's reflection. 
[verse 27] 
(8) Through the example of hallucination, making clear the fault 
of establishing the ultimate based on the relative 
Not understanding, the deer runs 
In confusion after the water's mirage. 
Likewise, the ignorant cannot {evade} thirst, and die. 
Claiming it is ultimate, some take up bliss. [verse 28] 
APPENDIX I 135 
II.C.2.b) The actual path of mahamudra 
(1) A brief explanation based on the special pith instruction of the 
four symbols 
The relative truth [refers to mindfulness}; nonminding 
[Points to} those mental states when the mind is released from 
[mindfulness}. 
When completely tramformed, this is the supreme of the supreme. 
[The result} is the genuine supreme. Friends, you should know 
these. [verse 2:9) 
(2) Explaining each of these in detail 
This has four divisions: 
(a) Having realized nonminding to be the samadhi of the lion's 
play, we are not affected by the swamp, given as an example. 
The mind released from mindfulness engages in samiidhi. 
It is completely purified of the ajflictiom. 
As the [utpala] born from a swamp is not stained by it, 
So [the mind itselj] is not affected by the faults arising from 
samsara nor by the qualities found in the VictoriotfS One. 
[verse 30] 
(b) Showing that having realized mindfulness to be the samadhi 
that realizes everything to be like an illusion, [we know) the 
unmoving and the inconceivable. 
136 A SONG FOR THE KING 
[Mindfulness} also sees with certainty that all [things} are like an 
illusion. 
Transcending the world, [take} this moment [into your mind} and 
rest evenly in meditation. 
Those whose minds [recognize] the teaching bind up ignorance. 
Self-arising and inconceivable, [wisdom} naturally abides 
[within}. [verse 31] 
(c) Showing that having realized the unborn to be the samadhi of 
the hero's stride, we transcend samsara 
These appearances have [the nature of] clarity; from the very first 
they are unborn. 
They do not [arise as an entity] with form; discard [as well think­
ing they arise] in the aspect of form's characteristics. 
Abide continually within the [mind] itself and practice only deep 
meditation. 
Without thought, [rest] in this meditation free of mental activity 
and free ofjlaws. [verse 32] 
(d) Having realized "beyond the mind" to be the vajralike samadhi, 
showing to the practitioner-through all phenomena not being 
separate-the very nature of mahamudra 
Intellect, mind, and mental appearances have this very nature. 
All the worlds appearing in their diversity have this very nature. 
All the varieties of the seen and the seer have this very nature. 
Attachment, desire, aversion, and bodhicitta, too, have this very 
nature. [verse 33] 
APPENDIX I 137 
(3) Explaining in general how to practice with the lamp that is the 
mindfulness of the alaya (the all-basis) through listening, 
reflection, and meditation 
A lamp is lit in the darkness of ignorance. 
While you diffirentiate mental categories, 
You discard the mind's flaws. 
Reflect upon the nature of nonattachment. [verse 34] 
(4) An extensive explanation of key instructions on meditation, 
such as teaching that with realization, there is no negating and 
no constructing 
(a) A presentation [showing] that once [mind's nature] is realized, 
there is nothing to negate or construct; it is not vitiated by the 
flaws of tenets and systems 
There is no negating, no construCting, 
And no apprehending: it is inconceivable. 
The ignorant are bound by mental categories. 
The inseparable, the coemergent, is utterly pure. [verse 35] 
(b) A presentation showing how, through comprehending and 
attaining great bliss, the mind is liberated, clear, and unmov­
ing; there is nothing to be meditated upon 
Examining [emptiness} with [the reasoning ofj one or many, [you 
see that} it is neither. 
Through mere recognition, living beings are utterly freed. 
Meditate recognizing what is clear and unmoving. 
I apprehend the stable mind to be [just} that. [verse 36] 
138 A SONG FOR THE KING 
II.C.3. Explaining the flawless result 
a) Through the attainment of great bliss, primordial wisdom 
expands. 
Through attaining the vast land of happiness, 
And through seeing [its own nature}, mind becomes vast. 
You walk through the land, yet [mind's nature} is not separate. 
[verse 37]54 
b) Delineating the five kayas through the emanation of two form 
kayas from the dharmakaya, which is free of mental constructs 
[Coemergent] joy [is the dharmakaya}. [The sambhogakaya] is the 
seedling ofjoy 
And superior; the leaves come forth. 
At the time [of the path, the dharmakaya} does not radiate in. the 
ten directiom. 
Bliss free of comtructs is fruition itself [verse 38] 
c) Since, ultimately, sentient beings and the buddhas are not 
established at all, the benefit for ourselves and for others is 
nondual. 
Those [staying] in that [land ber~:efit] those [living] there [but} are 
not [truly} existent. 
[Nevertheless,} there is a need that they [stay} in that [place, 
benefiting] those [beings}. 
Attached and [ultimately] not attached are the form [kayas},· 
Emptiness is [imeparable from appearance}. [verse 39] 
APPENDIX I 139 
III. The Conclusion (by way of showing the meaning of what is 
flawless) 
[It is not like a} pig attached to the mire ofsamsara. 
[Once} you have realized the flawless mind, what fault is there? 
Any[-one who practices} like this is not affected by anything. 
Why would [this person} be bound by flaws? [verse 40] 
These verses were composed directly by glorious Saraha, great lord of 
practitioners. This concludes A Song of Yogic Conduct from The Treasury 
of Spiritual Songs. It was translated from the Indian original into Tibetan 
by the bilingual Nepali, Lama Asu. 

Appendix 2 
A Song for the King in Tibetan 
~1 1~~~·~~·~1 ~l<J·lfff¥~·~·~·~·9·~r t.r~·~~·~1 
~ Cl Cl ~ 
~l<j·~"£'~·~~·~~·~~·~~;~1 
I. ~'4~~·~·~e.~·~t.l"'-l'n.l'~~·~cf;n.l'ilil1 
~5~·~f~~·~~·.z ~~r~~·t.l·n.1·~~·~£;n.1·ar,1 
~·'ll~~r::.:9~·~~~·t.l~·~·~ar~~n - ~·(l,l·~U!·~~·~~~~·~~~·~·~~n 
~ 
~·'ll~'~n.l·t:T~·O'.!~~·~~~·~z;·~·U!t;'11 
~9·~~·~·U!z;·~~·t.l·~·t~~·~~n 
2. ~·'ll~·iJz;~·t.l~·~t~·~~·q'll~·t.l·ttt~n 
o.y~·~·~~~·~~·~~·~·~z;·~·'l5~11 
~·(l,l·~'ll·~·'ll·~~·~~~·~~·(l,ln 
~O'.!~·~~~·~~~~·tr~·~z;·n 
141 
142. A SONG FOR THE KING 
3· &o,y·~·o,y~· iJ·o,yr;·tfiJ~·~~·@r;·n 
'-.:I "" 
£l~·iT~·r-r~r~~·r.y~·~~~.rr.r~~11 
~~·~1011·~~·r.y~·ij~~·~~·~:::r~~·@r;'11 
~·~r;·iJr;~·r.y·~~·"'l~~·?·~r;·11 
"" 
4· ~·tf~·t~~·r.y·~r;·~o,yg.~~·~~·~r;·11 
q~~·r.y·~·o,y·~~·@r;·q~~·r.y·~~·~~·~ro,y~11 
"" "" 
~·f!·~~~·~r;·~r;·q~·~~·r.y·~~11 
~0\·r.y··~·o,y·~~·@r;·~ro,y~·r.y~·~~ 11 
"" 
5· ~·~~·~·~~~·~~·~·~o,yg-"'1~11 
~alr;~·~~·~·~·~~·~r;·~~·@r;·11 
~·~·o,y·~o,y~·~o,y·o,yrz:t~·~~·~r;·o,y~o,y11 
~'4"'l't;J'iJ~·~r;·~~q·r.y·~~·@r;·il~ 11 
6. ~"'l·q~~~·~o,y·t~~·r.y~·arr;~·~r;·q~11 
~~·~~·~~·r.y·~~~·~·~r;·q~~·~~11 
~·"'l~·~~q·~·~r;·~~~·r.y·~11 
~'"'!'~ r(~·~r;·~?(~·tfil~·r.y~r;· iT~ 11 
7· 
8. 
9· ~~·q~·q~·z:r~l:\~·~~·~~~·~·~-§f 
~ 
~~·~~·~~·q~·q~·~·~·q~·s.~n 
~l:\·~·rz;t~·~~·~l:\'~'~'t:T'~11 
~ijl:\'t:t~·~·s.~~~·?·~J:\·q~·~~n 
~ ~ ~ 
~~·~l:\·~~·~~·~~·q~~·~·s.~·~11 
~fl~·q·~~·~~·~·~·~~·q~~·s.~n 
~~:ff~·~~·~rz;t~·q~~·~·~ijl:\'t:t~·S-~11 
~ ~ 
~~~·~·~~·~~~·~~·~~1:\·~~·q~·~~ APPENDIX 2 143 
~l:\·q~·~~:s·s·~·~~~·q·~11 
~~~·~~·~·s·l:\~·~~·z·~~~n 
~·~~'ij.'l:\~·~~~·q·~l:\~'~~·~11 
~~·q~·~l:\·~~~·~ij~·q~·~~~·q~·s.~11 
~ ~ 
IO. t:l':i}J:\'~J:\'l~·~·~~·~J:\'S~'~J:\'11 
e_·~~·~·~l:\·~~·q~·~~·q·qq~11 
~ 
~~·~~·~·~~~~·t~~·q~~·q~·it~~n 
~1:\·~~~·~~·t~~·q·~~·q~·~~n 
144 A SONG FOR THE KING 
II. a·~::.:~~t-r~r~·~~·~~n 
12. 
14. ~·~'?(~·r;t·~~ait::\~·r~~r~t::\::1\'"1::1\'~::1\11 
~ 
"1;~·~~·il~~·a~·~CC\~·~~~·~~·~C\·11 
~"'l·~~~·~C\'"1~,:~::~:.,·~::~:.,·~·~a:tt ~ ~ ~ ~ -111 
"1"(~·5·~~·~·~~·"1~"'1' ~·~~·~11 
"1!f~·~·~~·~·~·~~·"1~·"1·~~n 
~ 
e.·~::~:.,·~§~·~·~·~~',t::\t::\~·~·~t::\"11 
a;::~:.,·~·"1"1·~~·~~·~~·~::~:.,·~~n 
~C\·tr-.e·~·~·"1~~·~CC\~·~·~~ n 
~~·~·.e·~'"1::1\'~·~~~·~·~~11 
~ 
~~·?~~·~~·,t::\~·~~·~~·~~·"'111 
~ ~ 
w-t::\·~·~t::\'~'~t::\'~'"1(,·~~·~1 
~·~::~:.,·~~~·~t::\·~~~·~t::\'~'~11 
~C\·"1·~~·a~~~·~::~:.,·~::~:.,·"1·~~11 
~,.,t::\.~t::\~·~,~·~·£!·~~::1\'~1 
,t::\~·~·,~·~~·~·~::~:.,·Uft::\~'~~~11 
.,... 
::t 
N 
~ 
Q z 
lZl 
1'. 
1'. < 
w w 
~ icr ~ 
~ p? 
}~ 
}if f! ttl 
~ 
~ 6Ul 
"' .... ~ 
~ 
!7 w fr 
~ 
!7 w ~ 
Ct6 
~ 
~ hl6 -&.? 
6~ 
w 
~ 
rf 
itf-1 
~ 
~ t( 
~ (l.( --~ ~ . 3' t( . 
i7 !C) icr ... 
11-t..C' ttl [l . ir<) p? 
• r W l( E7 
f6 w f! . 
i7 6!0 icr 61.ll Ill . 
~ }~ 
Gj6 I~ 
\!) .... ~ 
~ 
!7 
MP 
~ 
~ 
!£'-;> 
t6""" 
~? 
~ p? 
>W 
~ -
~ f 
~ 
~ 
!7 ... ttl 
~? w w Jf 
~ (l.( E 
~ w ~ 
~ i7 
~ 
}~ 
~ 
}~ 
lP IT ~ >w . ~ 
!7 ~ w . 
~? ~ ... m2 if E7 
~41 w }kr 
E7 if ~3' c ie;> ie;> ~ . i7 w . 
Gf7 [5 
~{! 
" .... -rt 
tff 
~ -::::= w f? ~ . . ~ 
i7 l.l? ~ • • 1.{ 
~ ..:f Jf • . i7 w w . 
!7 ~ ,f w ~ ~ 
~? if Glrl 
!T ~ " w W1 ~ 
!7 !£'-? w \E7 t6""" ~ 
11-t..C' ~ IW 
00 .... ~ 
}~ 
[6' 
Jp 
~ 
~ w 
~ 
~ " !T 
~ -tie == 
}~ }~ icr <U 6t( 63' 
GEl t6 \i=l u llB i?' :--~ i7 it: w ~ 
!r? }~ 
~ 63' .... {! (l.( 
146 A SONG FOR THE KING 
19. t:TJ~·~~rt:TJ~~·~~·~~~·£l·t:TJ~~·~n 
::Il~'~t:l"J't:l"J~~·~~·~t:l"J'~~~·t:TJ~~·~·~0\11 
~·~~·~·::r~·~~·~·~·t:TJ·~r;·,, 
~-....:>-....:> 
20. 
21. 
22. ij.'t:TJ8.·~~~·~~·t:TJ·~r;·~~1 
~~ ~ ~ 
t:TJ~t:TJ·~ r;·~·~·i!~~·~·~~~·t,y·~~,, 
~ 
t:TJ~~·~·tir;~·O\~·~~·t,y·~t:l"J'?'~~ 
~ 
~:€r;·~~O\·~·~·~r;·~·~~~·~,, 
~ -....:> 
~·~~·~r;·l·~·~·~·~t:TJ·ar~n 
fl·~~·~~·~·urr;~·~·a;t:TJ~·0\~·~,1 
~~·~~·~0\·~~·~0\·~~·~r;~·t,y·lfl 
~·~·&~·0\~·~r;·O\~·~sr;·~n 
~ ~ ~ 
~·~~·t,ya.·t:TJ?~·~·~s·~~·s.~ n 
"' "' 
~r;·~·~~~·fr;·t.t8.·&~·~·~,, 
-....:> -....:> 
~~·t,y·~·~a.·~~·$~·~~~·~·~~,, 
0\~·~fl~·~~·~~·~~·t,y·~r;·~~~·t.ta.n 
t:TJ~r;·~~·~~~·~~·~~·~a.·~~·~~·t,y11 
~ ~ 
23. e:'fl~:::1~rs·~"·"~·~::l~·~~.r~n 
~q"·q~ih~r~~·~"'l·~"·r.r~n · 
~~·~fl~·~"·~!:~·~~·q~"·~r~11 
~~·~·~"·"·~~·r.y"~~·r.y·~" n 
~ 
24. r:r%"'1·~~~·r.y~·"'l~~·~·?.("·~"·~~n 
~:~~·:!~·~~·~~·~·~~·qa~n 
~~~·q"·~~·r.y~~'?'"'!l"'l~·s.~·~ll 
~ ~ 
~·~~·"q~·~~·~~·~"·r.y·~~·s"n 
25. "~·~"'l·~·~~·~"'l·r.y~·"'lc;~·~·~~n 
"'l~·~~·q%~~·r.y·~·~~·-§.1~·~~·3"1l 
fl'?f"'l·~s.-q~·~~":s·~·~~·s"n 
ii'~~·r.y~·~~·~~·q~"'l·r.y·~~~·r.y~n 
26. ~·~·"·~~·"'l~"·@:z~~·lil~n 
'?~~·~~·~"·~~·?f~·"~·~q·r.y"'~"ll 
~ 
£·~~·q~·~·~~·~·~"'l~'r.y"·~~ll 
~~·r:r~·~"'l·q~·q·~"'l·~~·s~l1 APPENDIX 2 147 
148 A SONG FOR THE KING 
27. ~0"'~ ~-"' ·~ru.r :t..·:t..~· ~·~·t:~~.:s~n 
~~·~~·~s·t:~~·~~·t:l~t:l~·t:l~~·~~·11 
~~~·~r~~·t:~~·~~·~~·~~·r,r3:t..11 
~~~·t:~~~·~~·r-ri!·a:!~·'W·t:~·t:~~~11 
28. ~·'W:t.,·~~~~·ru~·~~·~·~·~n 
" 
a_~~·q~·~t:~~·~~·~·~~~·~~·"':t..·s~ 11 
" " --£1 C\. !!~~·"'·~~·"'· ·~~·a_a;·t:~:t.,·~:t.,n 
~~·~~·~~·~~·3:t.,·~~·t:l~'t:!'~~11 
29. ~~·ft:~·t:l~ ~·"'·s ~·"'· il~ ·q·~11 
~~~·~~·~~~·~·i!~·q:t.,·~:t.,''-191 
" 
"'C\. - -C\. -~ ·~~·ll.!~~·~·~:t.,''-1'5-la;~·~· o.la;~1 
5.3~~·~-~5.3''-l'~~~·~~~~·q:t._•$~11 
30. ~5-l~·~·s~·i!~·~~·~·a_~~·~·f:t..n 
-- - "'C\. - ~~·o.l~~·ll.!~~·~·~~·qa_~·~·~~·~11 
~''fJ:t.,'Q,~~·~~·a,~~·$~·£T·~~·t:l~~11 
~~·~~·~~·q~·~~·~~·£1·~~·~1 
" 
0\ 
'<t" 
H 
N 
~ 
Q z 
~ 
"" "" < -
~ 
~ -}~q-o/ it J:n) L.C'--
{!1.!' [l 
!7 it !f !!"" . tU 
rrf 1! tr ,FF t6 !9 . ar 
~? ~ ar ;:7 
!9 w w ~ t6 . 
~ ~ l{ • 
fS' 6ff (IJ {!" 
..... 
"" == tcr 
~t( 63' ? . 
. ;:7 
~ ~ it v 6.e tU 
{!" ~ . [l FF . 
!6? ~ 6i.C'-• v ~ 
FF 6~ ar . 
&-" 6~ tU . 
}!9 t6 !1{! w 
'~ !7 . ~\ ~ !-fV? 
[l ~ ~ 
;r.:1 
t( 
i7 
(~ ~ • tt() L\ tu '!fi"V ~ 
!6 ~ w t( ~~ ar . 
~~ w 
}i7 FF it !!l2 
~ ~ 
!7 6fS' c t6 w tu f7 ~ 61J w !! FF 
~ w 
ri 
"" -Lr" :::= 
1lP 6w [l? . . t6 FF . 4¥-w 
tu~ l.C'-• FF .u • l.C'-t6 FF w . [l t6 
it ~ ~ ir w fi6 tU flr( FF . 
jr? ~ ;;?46 . c ar . 
6~ ar fir 63' -
6~ f (!{ 
~ 
~ ~ 
~ 
~ 
!!"" w 
~ it 
}~ 
"" "" -=== ? ar 6~ 
6~ FF w ~ tir (!{ 
i7 ~ it it ~ }Ill . t6 !{? i1P tU . ~ \l{ FF illl . t6 FF . ar W it c? v ~ tU . 
(H.C' w r;:-'1[ 6li( • 
{!" ~ -? 
6~ FF ar 
!7 (IJ 
~ 
~ rw 
i7 
!{1? 
~ 
~ 
6ir--
~ 
~ t f( 
Wo1 
fi6 tu };ffil 
i< 
~ 
t6? 
~ 
6ir-­FF 
-.:!-
"" ~ 
~ 
ti1P ar 
63' }mr ar 
~ ~ 
Wo1 t6 
6lr( 
~ 
~ t6 rw ir 6W7 fir ~ 
~ f 
~ [l it t( tu 
(~ 
~ 
150 A SONG FOR THE KING 
3 5. ~t:llt:ll·~· ~~·~z:;.:~t:rt.r ~~ 11 
"" 
r.l.tC\·~·~~·~·q~a\l·~·~qll 
z~·~s.-q~·iJ"~·~a\l~·r.l.~"-·11 
~~~·~~·~C\.~t:ll·a~·~a\l.~t;fj 1 
36. t;fj~t;fj'~".·~·a\l~'~a\l't::l~~~·~t;fj'~~·~C\11 ..__, 
~~·~·~a\l·~~·(.l,~t::l'~a\1'~~·~"-Yll 
t;fj~"-Y't::l't;fj".'~t;fj~~·q·q!fa\l'~'t::l~C\11 
~·t:ll~·~~~·~·q~t:ll·~~·~~·~"-'11 
37· '1t:llr.l.'t::ll~~·~~·~"'Y·~q·~n 
a\1~"-·q~·~a\l~·~·~a\l·~~·~~n 
~"'Y'"'f'~~·@".'i;J'~~·~~ll 
38. ~t;fjr.l.'t::l't::l~'q~·~t;fj'~"-'11 ..__,..__, 
a\l~t;fj·~·(.l,~t::l·a\l·a~·~·~11 
a·~~·~t:ll~·~~·~·(.l,~t::ln 
~~·~~·q~·q~·(.l,~~~·~~n 
39· ::Tl"-'~~·::Tl"-'~'z:Tl"-'IJJ'~·~::Tl·ii~11 
~ 
~·ttt~·~~·~·(JJ·~~~·q·~~11 
~~·~r~::Tl~·q·~"·~·~·~::Tl~·q~n 
~::Tl~'o/\'~::Tl·~·f"-·q·~~·ttt~~l 
40. ~~·q~·~~~·~~·r.;y::Tl·~~n 
s·ii~·~~~·~:l\·~~·~·ar~11 
z:Tl"-'Ul"-'~::Tl·~~·~·~~·qll 
~'Ul"-·~·ttt~·~·~:l\·~~"'11 APPENDIX 2 151 
~(JJ'~:l\·~~t:T"-'~::Tl·~~·~~q(JJ·~·:l\·~~·~QJ·~·~~·~~~·q1 
~ 
tf~·~t~·~~·s:z::y·~~·q~·~·fz:!l~'~l 

Appendix 3 
A Comparison of the Root Texts 
The following annotations list the discrepancies between two recensions 
of the Tibetan root text and show the chosen rendering in bold. These 
annotations are listed in the first column by verse and line. The first 
recension of the text is the root text (RT) as it appears in the Derge edi­
tion. The second version is the text as it appears in Karma Trinlepa's 
commentary (KTL). Many of the preferred readings were established 
through consulting Thrangu Rinpoche (TR). 
VERSE/ RT VERSION KTLVERSION NOTE 
LINE 
rb 52.6: ba'i 165.3: bas TR prefers KTL 
rd 53.1: rnarn pa 165.6: snang ba 
2a 53.1: bzlog 166.1: log 
3d 53.2: du r66.5: tu 
6c 53-4= las 169.4: de la 
7C 53·5= sbrang rtsi I7I.I: missing 
8b 53·5= dag 171.4: rnarns 
8c 53-4= cig 171.5: gcig 
9C 53·6: ji 172.2: de TR prefers KTL 
9d 53.6: rnthug 172.4: thug TR prefers RT 
roa 53.6: ba lang 176.6: ba glang TR prefers KTL 
rob 53·7= skarn 173.1: skarns 
rod 53·7= yang na missing in 173.2-173·3 
rod 53·7= skarn 173.3: skarns 
153 
154 A SONG FOR THE KING 
na 53·7= tsha 175.2: tshwa 
nb 53·7= dngar 175.3: mngar TR prefers KTL 
12C 54.1: 'brug missing in 176.5 
I2C 54.1: sngangs 176.5: dngangs TR prefers KTL 
13a 54.1: tha ma 177.3: mtha' ma 
13b 54.2: tha ma 177.5: mtha'ma 
13C 54.2: du 177.6: tu 
13C 54.2: rtog 177.6: rtogs TR prefers RT 
13d 54.2: pas so 178.4: yin no 
15a 54·3= ngos kyi 182.1: ngos su TR prefers KTL 
15d 54·3= bdan 182.4: bden 
16b 54·4= du 183·3= tu 
r6c 54·4= gyis 183·4= gyi 
17b 54·4= !tar 184.1: su 
17d 54·5= du 184.2: tu 
21a 54·6: su 187.6: ni 
21C 54.6: gang zhig 188.1: de ni TR prefers KTL 
22h 55-1: bas 189.3: byas TR prefers KTL 
23a 55-1: ni missing in 190.1 
24a 55-2: kha cig 109.3-4: kha cig 
tsangs ba'i 'odspar na 
gnassu 'od tshangs pa'i 
sparnas gnas su 
25d 55-3: rin cher 191.3: rin po che RT corrected to 
rin chen 
25C & d The order is 
reversed in KTL 
27a 55·4= e bam 193.2: e vam TR prefers KTL 
27d 55·4= zhes pa 195-1: zhen pa 
28b 55·5= rgyugpar 195-1: brgyug 
28c 55·5= ngoms 195.6: nus TR prefers KTL 
28c 55·5= 'ching 195.6: 'chi 
29b 55·5= dang 196.6: gang TR prefers KTL 
APPENDIX 3 155 
30C 55.6: chugs 199.3: gos 
31a 55-7: blta 199.6: ita 
3IC 55.7: brtan 200.2: bstan 
3IC 55.7: 'ching 200.3: 'chang 
33a 56.1: de 201.6: de'i 
33b 56.1: dag 202.2: dang 
33d 56.2: de 202.4: de'i 
34b 56.2: blo mi 203.3: blo'i corrected to yi 
35b 56.3: de 204.2: 'di 
36a 56.3: dumas 204.5: duma 
36c 56.4: bsgom 205.3: sgom 
36c 56.4: bstan 205.3: brtan TR prefers KTL 
36d 56+ bdagnyid 205-3: bdag gis 
36c & d 56.3-4: pal ba 205.2-3: pal ba gang Translation 
gang zhig shes zhigmig.yo follows KTL 
pa bsgompa ba'i shes pa I sgom 
brtan I mi g.yo'i brtan sems ni 
sems ni bdag bdag gis de ru 
nyidde ru gzung 
gzung 
37b 56.4: mthong ba'i 205.6: mthong bas 
37C s6.4: bros 206.1: phros 
37C s6.4: med 205.6: min 
38a s6.4: dang 206.4: ste 
38b s6.4: skyed 206.5: skye 
38b s6.4: sti missing corrected to ste 
39d 56.s: ni 208.3: pa 
40C s6.6: dag 209-4: gang 

Appendix4 
e; 
Some Reflections on Dran med 
The translation of the Tibetan term dran (pa) med (pa) (pronounced 
"drenmay") presents an interesting complexity. As a standard form of 
negation, med pais rather easily translated: it usually means "not" "with­
our," "nonexistent," or "there is/are none of." Dran pa, however, is chal­
lenging, as it has a wide range of meaning, clustered around the two 
terms "memory" and "mindfulness." These meanings can include: "rec­
ollecting," "memorizing," "being mindful of," "recognition," "remem­
bering," "holding in 
mind," "consideration," "thinking about," "missing 
someone or something," and "pay attention to." The particular transla­
tion that is chosen from all of these possibilities depends on the context 
in which dran pa or dran med appears. 
The term dran meditselfhas a long history. An early instance of its rise 
to prominence was in eighth-century Tibet during the critical and still­
discussed debate between Kamalasila from India and Hwa Shang 
Mahayana from China. According to the Tibetan tradition, there were 
two main points in contention: whether good deeds were necessary to 
attain enlightenment and whether thoughts should be obliterated or not. 
It is said that Hwa Shang advocated the eradication of all discursive 
thinking and emphasized a practice that led to the absence of mental 
activity. In Tibetan, the terms used in the debate were yid fa mi byed pa 
(Skt. amanasiktira) or dran med (Skt. asmrti), which David Ruegg has 
translated respectively as "non-mentation" and "non-minding."ss In the 
context of Hwa Shang's reported position, these terms are pushed to 
their extreme to mean elimination of all thought processes, whether good 
157 
158 A SONG FOR THE KING 
or bad. This would mean that with no thoughts, there are no deeds, no 
good actions in the world, and no accumulation of merit. According to 
Kamala5ila, however, what is meant by non-menta~ion is not just an 
absence of mentation; the term implies the lack of objectification and the 
nonfunctioning of ordinary apprehension, both of which are experi­
enced by someone whose prajfia is engaged in analysis. 56 
Matthew Kapstein also notes the bi-valence of the term. In discussing 
the views of a dzogchen master, Kapstein translates dran pa as "mne­
monic engagement" and dran med as "amnesis" or a lack of mindfulness, 
which is active in "constituting the bewilderment of samsara." He notes, 
however, that in terms of practicing the path, dran med can also mean 
"freedom from discursive thought." 57 With this meaning in mind, he 
quotes the master again: "Mnemic engagement is the ground; amnesis is 
the path .... Mnemic engagement is appearance; amnesis is empti­
ness .... "58 Here, dran medis equated with the path and with emptiness. 
Herbert Guenther translates dran pa as "memory" and dran med as 
"non-memory," though he hastens to say that this translation "should 
not be confused with the usual associations the word memory carries for 
us."59 He sets the terms, which he understands to have an inbuilt ten­
·sion between them, in a dynamic discussion of"wholeness transcending 
the pale of the ego-centered mind that 'grasps' whatever it fancies there 
'to be grasped' and at the same time invites us to cultivate a visionary 
capacity and joyful ecstasy." 60 Throughout his extended discussion of 
the term dran med, Guenther almost always prefers to leave the term in 
Tibetan, which leads one to believe that he is not very satisfied with 
"non-memory" as a translation. And, despite his protestations, it is 
indeed difficult to shake the connotation of bringing up the past. 
Now let us turn to Saraha. As did Kamalasila, Saraha used the term 
dran med not on the superficial level of absence of thought but more 
deeply. In verse 30, he describes dran med as mind "completely purified 
of the afflictions"; like the utpala flower in a swamp, it is "not affected 
APPENDIX 4 159 
by the faults arising from samsara nor by the qualities found in the Vic­
torious Ones." In A Song for the People, he states that at the stage of dran 
med, "apprehending 'I' and 'mine' is forgotten."61 Here, dran med refers 
to a state beyond the afflictions and beyond the self. 
Karma Trinlepa glosses dran med as nonmentation, or "resting in the 
absence of mental activity."62 He gives it profound significance when 
discussing Saraha's four symbols by setting up the following correlations: 
(r) among the four joys, dran med corresponds to supreme joy, under­
stood as seeing that mindfulness and the nature of mind are emptiness; 
(2) among the four seals, it is the wisdom seal, understood as seeing the 
emptiness of mind's nature; and (3) among the four samadhis, it is the 
samadhi of the lion's play, understood as seeing that relative appearances 
have no true existence and that mindfulness, like a powerful lion, over­
comes all mental afflictions. 
In his oral commentary on A Song for the King, Thrangu Rinpoche 
underlined the ultimate meaning of the term. On verse 29, he com~ 
ments that dran med "does not mean that we lose the faculty of mind­
fulness; rather, it means seeing the nature of mind, seeing the emptiness 
of even mindfulness itself." On verse 27, he explains that it points to a 
time when the mind has come to rest and then one "is able to recognize 
the emptiness of mindfulness itself." From this perspective, mindfulness 
corresponds to samatha practice when the mind is calmed, and dran 
medto vipasyana when the nature of the mind is seen. Finally, concern­
ing verse 33, Thrangu Rinpoche describes dran med as "mindfulness dis­
solved into the expanse beyond mindfulness." 
How then to translate dran med? Traleg Kyabgon Rinpoche suggested 
"mindfulness of nonmindfulness," which captures many of the mean­
ings, but it is a bit cumbersome for verse. Other possibilities are: releaseld 
from mindfolness, which was sometimes used in the translation in the 
sense of letting go of a mind engaged in thinking on a relative level; 
beyond mindfolness, which moves too far away from mindfulness, for the 
160 A SONG FOR THE KING 
emptiness of mindfulness itself must be allowed for; and absence of mind­
fUlness or without mindfUlness, which enforce too strong a negation, for 
as Thrangu Rinpoche noted, dran med does not mean that we lose the 
faculty of mindfulness. Finally, it seemed that nonminding caught the 
widest range of meaning while not excluding deeper levels. In Merriam 
Webster's Collegiate Dictionary, Eleventh Edition, "to mind" can mean "to 
consider important" and "to be concerned about." Its negation would 
imply a lack of concern or importance, and this relates directly to 
Saraha's indication that dran med means that one forgets the self: con­
cerns about "I" and "mine" are dropped. As in the statement, "I don't 
mind," there's an indifference to the dramas of the self. Further, The 
New Shorter Oxford English Dictionary lists many meanings for "to mind" 
that correspond to mindfulness: "remember," "recollect," "bear in 
mind," "pay attention to," and "notice." In this context, nonminding 
would mean not engaging in ordinary thinking-not being caught by 
the conceptualizing that binds us to the relative world-which 1:hen 
allows for the realization of the deeper truth, the seeing of mind's empty 
nature. 
Even if one could find the perfect English term that corresponds 
exactly to the Tibetan, it would not be possible to convey all the lev­
els and dynamics of meaning that are implied by dran med. As with so 
many of the terms in Buddhism-emptiness, dependent arising, and 
no self, to name a few-the full range of meaning can be understood 
only through study. Indeed, it is possible to argue that research into 
Buddhism could be condensed into discussions of these terms. 
Notes 
The most comprehensive study to date of Sarah a is Kurtis Schaeffer 's excellent Dream­
ing the Great Brahmin: Tibetan Traditions of the Buddhist Poet-Saint Saraha (New York: 
Oxford University Press, 2005). The text also contains a translation ofSaraha'sA Song 
for the Peopk along with commentary. 
For an insightful look at the cultural and scholarly background for Saraha's spiri­
tual songs, see: Roger R. Jackson, Tantric Treasures: Three Collections of Mystical Vtrse 
ftom Buddhist lndiq (New York: Oxford University Press, 2004). The book contains 
an annotated translation of A Songfor the hopk and a useful abstract of themes found 
in all the songs: "(1) a rhetoric of paradox, (2) cultural critique, (3) focus on the innate, 
(4) affirmation of the body, the senses, and sexuality, (5) the promotion of certain 
yogic techniques, and (6) celebration of the guru." p. 16. 
2 For early maharnudra, see George N. Roerich, The Blue Annals (Delhi: Motilal Banar­
sidass, 1976), esp. pp. 839f£ 
3 Schaeffer, Dreaming the Great Brahmin, p. 86. 
4 Doha skor gsum ti ka 'bring po urns kyi rnam thar ston pa'i me long (Kun2ang Tobgyel, 
Thimphu, Bhutan: Druk Sherig Press, 1984), f. 135.1-4. 
5 With interpolations from Karma Trinlepa's commentary in brackets, the complete 
verse reads: 
The four letters, which [are the means] to accomplish (the supreme sidd.hi, indicate the 
four stages: mindfulness, nonminding, the unborn, and beyond the intellect] . 
Among these, I first reach [mindfulness] . 
As you drink the elixir [of nonminding , apprehending) "I" [and "mine"] is forgotten . 
Whoever (realizes char mind itself is forever unborn will come) to know the reality of 
the single letter (A, rhe unborn]. 
(Ultimately beyond the inrellecc). the [narure of mind] knows neither name (nor symbol]. 
Sgrub yig bzhi las dang po bdag gis ston I khu ba 'thungs bas nga ni brjed bar gyur I gang 
gis yi ge gcig shes pa I de yis ming ni mi shes so. Saraha, Dohakoshagiti. Do ha mdzod gyi 
glu (Delhi: sDe-dge Bstan-gyur. Delhi Karmapae Chodhey Gyalwae Sungrab Partun 
Khang, 1982-1985), Rgyud 'gre4 (D2224), vol. Wi., f. 76.1. 
"The four letters" refer m E Yam Ma Ya, which is the fourth level of interprerarion 
given by Karma Trinlepa. 
6 Spro pa phyi nas gcod dang nang nas gcod /Ita ba'i stong lugs mi gcig man na yang I thab 
kyi me bsad du ba 'gags pa !tar I nang du rang sems rtsa ba gcod pa zab. Karma chags 
med, 'Phags pa thugs rje chen po'i dmar khrid phyag rdzogs zung Jugs gi nyams kn sny­
ing po bsdus pa. From Gdam ngag mdzod (Delhi: Sechen Publications, 1999), ff. 
327·5-}28 .1. 
161 
162 A SONG FOR THE KING 
7 These four stages are presented sequentially by Karma Trinlepa in his commentary on 
A Song for the People. However, in A Song for the King, Saraha reverses the first two 
stages, so that nonminding comes first, followed by mindfulness. In this way, we are 
given at the outset a taste of what it is to be free of the afflictions, and then we return 
to the first stage to establish a more stable and tranquil mind. 
8 The four yogas are described by the Ninth Karmapa, Wangchuk Dorje, in his texts on 
the practice of mahamudra. For detailed discussion, see the Dbang phyug rdor rje, 
Rgyal dbang Ka rma pa, Lhan cig skyes sbyor gyi zab khrid nges don rgya mtsho'i mying 
po phrin las 'od 'phro (Rumtek, Sikkim: Dharma Chakra Centre, n.d.); Mahamudra: 
The Ocean of Definitive Meaning, trans. Elizabeth M. Callahan (Seattle: Nitartha Inter­
national, 2001), pp. 211-46; Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche, Essentials of Mahamudra: 
Looking Directly at the Mind (Boston: Wisdom Publications, 2004), pp. 242-49. 
9 For example, Mahamudra and Clarifying the Natural State by Dakpo Tashi Namgyal 
and the three great commentaries on mahamudra by the Ninth Karmapa, Wangchuk 
Dorje: The Ocean of Definitive Meaning, Eliminating the Darkness of Ignorance, and 
Pointing Out the Dharmakaya. See the bibliography for Thrangu Rinpoche's com­
mentaries on these texts. 
10 The short lineage passes from Tilopa to Naropa, Marpa, Milarepa, Gampopa, and 
then to the First Karmapa, Diisum Khyenpa, down to the present Seventeenth 
Karmapa, Ogyen Trinley Dorje. 
11 The long lineage passes from Sakyamuni Buddha to Saraha, Nagarjuna, Shavari, 
Maitripa, Marpa and then continues the same as the short lineage down to the pres­
ent Karmapa, Ogyen Trinley Dorje. 
12 These are discussed in greater detail in the commentary on the four symbols begin­
ning with verse 29. 
13 mda' is Tibetan for "arrow" and brda' is Tibetan for "symbol." 
14 For a version of this text plus scholarly commentary on its history and on Saraha him­
self, see Herbert V. Guenther, tr., The Royal Song of Saraha: A Study in the History of 
Buddhist Thought (Seattle: University ofWashington Press, 1969; Taiwan: SMC Pub­
lishing, 1992). This translation is reprised in Herbert V. Guenther, tr. Ecstatic Spon­
taneity: Saraha's Three Cycles of Doha (Fremont, CA: Asian Humanities Press, 1993). 
15 "How things really are," or "abiding reality" (Tib. gnas lugs) is paired with "how they 
appear," or "apparent reality" (Tib. snang lugs). They belong to sets ~f terms in which 
one element relates to the ultimate level and the other to the relative, such as empti­
ness and appearance, the definitive and the provisional, and so forth. 
16 phyag rgya chen po. 
17 An etymology given at the beginning of a text or discussion is often focused more on 
presenting the condensed meaning of the whole text than on the usual tracing of a 
term's linguistic origin. 
18 p~yag 'tshal ba. 
19 phyagma. 
20 Gsa! ba is also translated as "cognizance," since it refers to the mind's ability to know. 
The related term 'od bsal is translated variously as "radiant clarity," "cognitive lucid­
ity," or "luminosity." It is also paired with emptiness to indicate that empty does not 
mean a void or vacuum: it is the unceasing source of all appearance and all knowing. 
21 A synonym for doha in Tibetan is rdo rje mgur, "vajra song." For an excellent discus­
sion of the origins of the doha and their language of Apabhramsa, see Schaeffer, 
Dreaming the Great Brahmin, esp. chap. 4· 
NOTES 163 
22 Mafijusri is the deity who embodies wisdom, and so he is often supplicated by the 
translator at the beginning of a text. 
23 The Heart Sutra belongs to a corpus of texts known as the Prajfiaparamita surras, 
which form the core pf the texts for the Buddha's middle turning of the wheel of 
Dharma. These sutras emphasized: the empty nature of phenomena; the development 
of the wisdom to see this reality; and the compassion to devote one's life to benefiting 
others. 
24 For a complete translation, see "The Song of Lodro Thaye" in The Rain ofWisdorn, 
trans. Nalanda Translation Committee (Boston: Shambhala Publications, 1980), pp. 
81-90. The line Thrangu Rinpoche discusses is found on p. 83: "There are both things 
as they are and the way of confusion." 
25 "Adventitious" here means that the confusion is separate from the nature of the mind, 
which remains pure and untouched by the delusion that makes up samsara. Since 
this bewilderment is not a part of mind itself, it can be removed through study, 
reflection, and meditation. 
26 This follows the commentary rather than the root verse, which runs: ji !tar rrnongs pas 
bzlog nas bltas pa yis, "The ignorant look with their eyes rolled back." 
27 Don sphyi, also translated as "generic image," refers to the mental image we create 
that is abstracted from our experience of numerous instances of an object. 
28 Sgra spyi, also translated as "generic sound," refers to any verbal convention, which can 
be applied to any object and therefore has no essential link to it. This becomes obvi­
ous when you think about a woman who is named Rose. Ordinary perception can be 
understood as a fusing of the generic image and the generic sound, happening so 
quickly that we are not aware of it and think that we are seeing an actual object that 
is indeed the name it is called. 
29 The reasoning of one and many is one of the main logical tools of the Middle Way. 
First, an object is analyzed to see that it is not one thing; for example, you see that even 
atoms have sides and directions and therefore are not unitary. Having proven that an 
object is not one thing, then an accumulation of these could not be any more real than 
the one thing that did not exist. Another famous reasoning is called the Diamond Sliv­
ers, which demonstrates a phenomenon to be free of arising through showing that it 
does not arise from itself, from another, from self and other combined, nor from a 
negation of this combination. The reasoning of dependent arising shows that phe­
nomena come about through the gathering of various causes and conditions and 
therefore do not ultimately exist. These three reasonings belong to the famous five rea­
sonings of the Middle Way. 
30 One of the five texts by Maitreya through Asanga, The Ornament of Clear Realization 
is a subtle presentation of meditative states and the Prajfiaparamita sutras. See 
Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche, The Ornament of Clear Realization: A Commentary on 
the Prajanaparamita by Maitreya (Crestone, CO: Namo Buddha Publications and 
Auckland: Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal Charitable Trust Publications, 2004). 
31 These last two lines give another example that illustrates the absence of increase 
and decrease. Karma Trinlepa explains that ultimately, the radiance of the great 
sphere is unceasing; within its vastness, living beings of the six realms take birth 
and pass away. In relation to this process, one should not understand taking birth 
as being a thing (some real entity) and passing away as a nonthing (the absence of 
a real entity). The perspective in these examples from verses 5 and 6 is that of a sys­
tem taken as a whole. Karma 'phrin las pa, Doha skor gsum ti ka 'bringpo sems kyi 
164 A SONG FOR THE KING 
rnam thar ston pa'i me long. (Kunzang Tobgyel, Thimphu, Bhutan: Druk Sherig 
Press, 1984), f. 169. 
32 Supreme Continuum by Maitreya through Asanga. The longer Sanskrit titles are: 
Mahiiyiinottaratantraiiistra or Ratnagotravibhanga. It was translated into Tibetan as 
Thegpa chen po rgyud bla ma bstan bcos (Toh. 4024). The text has been translated into 
English several times. Rosie Fuchs, tr., Buddha Nature: The Mahayana Uttaratantra 
Shastra by Arya Maitreya with Commentary by ]amgon Kongtrul Lodro Thaye, "The 
Unassailable Lion's Roar," and Explanations by Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche 
(Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion Publications, 2ooo); Ken Holmes, Maitreya on Buddha Nature 
(Forres, Scotland: Altea Publishing, 1999). 
33 Incongruent, or contradictory, means that the analogy shows what we should not do 
or what the nature is not. Congruent, or noncontradictory, means that the analogy 
shows what we should do or alludes to what the nature is. 
34 A classic example is the chariot (analogous to the present-day automobile). Until it is 
broken down into its parts, we might think there is something called "a chariot." But 
if each part is examined, it is obvious that a particular part is not the chariot and we 
have simply imputed the concept "chariot" onto a collection of parts. 
3 5 Passed from teacher to student, oral or "key" instructions describe how to practice. 
Even though many have been written down, they retain the lively and succinct qual­
ity of a personal encounter. 
36 Karma Trinlepa comments, regarding "First a thing and in the end a non thing," that 
you might think, "Spontaneously present, primordial wisdom first arises as a thing and 
then in the end passes away, turning into a nonthing." This type of thinking, however, 
creates an inherent nature both in appearance and in emptiness. Primordial wisdom, 
however, is unitary and not established as the duality of a thing and nonthing. Then 
again, primordial wisdom is not other than these two; it is not not these two. Karma 
'phrin las pa, f. 177. 
Karma Trinlepa presents the argument in this way to counteract two extreme views. 
His first point counteracts taking something to be permanent through possessing an 
inherent nature, and this is refuted. His second point counteracts taking something 
to be annihilated by affirming that primordial wisdom is not other than these two. 
37 An alternative translation of the last two lines: "Likewise, those who [enter] the cir­
cle of the mandala I Through the formless nature will know [uninterrupted medita­
tion]." "The circle of the mandala" refers to the central figure of the mandala along 
with the related deities. 
38 This statement may seem to be a paradox but it is based on two main factors: (1) not 
recogni2ing the empty nature of all appearances, including oneself, and (2) the pow­
erful, ingrained habits of perception that reinforce a way of seeing that is mistaken. 
These two taken together create a misapprehension that is vivid. In commenting on 
this verse, Karma Trinlepa notes that conceptualization itself is ignorance and culti­
vating that ignorance makes it clearer. Karma 'phrin las pa, f. 185. 
39 Following the explanations of the Third Karmapa, Rangjung Dorje, most Kagyii lamas 
follow a system of analyzing the mind into eight types of consciousness. The five types 
of sensory consciousness (visual, aural, olfactory, gustatory, and tactile) are noncon­
ceptual and function to gather raw data. The sixth (mental) consciousness integrates 
this information and can also create concepts. The seventh (affiicted) consciousness is 
a continuous sense of "I" that filters experience in terms of one's sense of self. The 
NOTES 165 
eighth consciousness, also called the alaya or all-basis consciousness, has two functions: 
It stores impressions from the consciousnesses related to the sense faculties and it also 
gives rise to habitual patterns that cause thought and activity. There are other schools 
of thought that accept only the first six consciousnesses and not the seventh and eighth. 
40 This refers to advanced practices with a consort. 
41 This line refers to the practice of tummo (Tib. gtum mo; Skt. ca!lrfali), "inner heat." 
"Space" indicates emptiness. According to Karma Trinlepa's commentary, "it" refers to 
the concentrated subtle energy that falls from the letter Ha1Jl visualized in the crown. 
The faults are clinging to this passing experience of bliss and, further, the illness that 
follows from that att:tchment. Karma 'phrin las pa, £ 189. 
42 These subtle energies are associated with completion stage practices and the six yogas 
ofNaropa. 
43 Also known as the Collection of Select Sayings. In Sanskrit, it is Udanavarga and in 
Tibetan, Ched du brjod pa'i tshoms (Toh. 326). 
44 Defiled virtue refers to positive actions that are performed by someone who is still 
caught within a world of dualistic perception. This means that there is consciousness 
of a subject and an object, a doer of the deed and a deed to he done. 
45 Another explanation relates to an esoteric technique involving the interaction of the 
tongue and the smaller tongue, which refers to the uvula. 
46 rang rig in Tibetan, aho translated as "reflexive awareness." 
47 rang rigpa'i ye shes in Tibetan, also translated as "primordial wisdom aware of its own 
nature." 
48 Karma Trinlepa gives extensive commentary here, noting for example that E is the 
expanse of beyond mindfulness and V.:m arises from it as a mere emanation. On 
the simplest level, he states that through analogies and their meanings, the reality 
of the letters E Vtzm can he correctly understood. Karma 'phrin las pa, f. 193· 
49 "Mindfulness" and "recollection'' both translate the Tibetan term dran pa. "Alertness" 
translates shes bzhin, which also comes into English as "attentiveness," "watchfulness," 
"conscientiousness," and "vigilance." For discussions of memory and mindfulness, see 
Janet Gyatso, ed., In the Mirror of Memory: Reflections on Mindfolness and Remembrance 
in Indian and Tibetan Buddhism (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1992). 
50 For an extended discussion of nonminding, see appendix 4, "Some Reflections on 
Dran med." 
51 In his commentary on the Prayer of Maitreya, Mendon Tshampa Rinpoche gives com­
mentary on three of these four samadhis in Mendon Tshampa Rinpoche, The Prayer 
of Maitreya and an Easy Path to Enlightenment: A Short Commentary on the Aspiration 
Prayer of Maitreya, trans. Michele Martin (Kathmandu: Marpa Institute for Transla­
tors, 1996), pp. 38-39. 
52 For an explanation of the four joys, see the commentary to verse 27. 
53 See footnote 26. 
54 In this edition of the text, verse 37 is only three lines. 
55 David Seyfort Ruegg, Buddha-nature, Mind and the Problem of Gradualism in a Com­
parative Perspective: On the Transmission and Reception of Buddhism in India and Tibet 
(New Delhi: Heritage Publishers, 1992), p. 99· 
56 Ibid., p. 94· 
57 Matthew Kapstein, "The Amnesic Monarch," in Gyatso, pp. 246-47. 
58 Ibid., p. 267, fn. 24. 
166 A SONG FOR A KING 
59 Guenther, Ecstatic Spontaneity, p. 38. 
60 Ibid., p. 40. 
61 See the discussion in the Editor's Introduction. 
62 De nas yid Ia mi byed pa'i ngang du Jog pa dran med kyi kho ba 'thung. Karma 'phrin 
las pa, Do ha skor gsum, £ 76.2. 
Glossary 
affiicted consciousness. See eight consciousnesses 
affiictions . See disturbing emotions 
aggregate (skandha, Skt.; phungpo, Tib.). The aggregates are the constituents of 
our mental and physical life. The five are: form, sensation, discrimination, 
mental formation, and consciousness. 
alaya consciousness. See eight consciousnesses 
bodhicitta (Skt.; byang chub kyi sems, Tib.). In general, this "mind of awakening" 
is the motivation to attain full awakening so that one can bring others to that 
same liberation. It is divided into ultimate bodhi-citta , which is the realization 
of mind's nature, and relative bodhi-citta, which is again divided into the aspi­
ration and the actual engagement in the practice of the six or ten perfections . 
bodhisattva (Skt.; byang chub sems dpa; Tib.). The Tibetan means a "hero of 
enlightenment." Bodhisattvas are those who have dedicated their lives to the 
realization of mind's nature and to compassionate action in order to help 
others on the path to liberation . The term refers both to individuals on the 
Mahayana path and to those who have achieved a high level of realization and 
abide on the bodhisattva levels, such as Avalokite5vara, the embodiment of 
compassion, and Mafijusri, the embodiment of wisdom. 
bodhisattva levels (bhumi, Skt.; sa, Tib.). The ten successive grounds or stages of 
a bodhisattva 's practice, beginning with the initial realization of emptiness 
on the first level and culminating with the vajralike samadhi at the end of the 
tenth level opening into full realization. On each level, there are defects to be 
discarded and qualities to be manifested. 
buddha nature (tathtigatagarbha, Skt.; de bzhin gshegs pa'i snyingpo, Tib.). A syn­
onym for the ultimate nature of mind, which emphasizes its stainless qualiry 
and its presence within all living beings as their primordial nature. While a 
168 A SONG FOR THE KING 
practitioner moves along the path to full awakening, this nature becomes 
increasingly apparent until it is fully revealed and manifest at the final stage 
of enlightenment. 
Cakrasarp.vara (Skt.; 'Khor lo sdom pa, Tib.). A semiwrathful male deity and the 
principal practice of the mother tantras. This is one of the five main practices 
in the Kagyii lineage. 
channels, winds, and drops (niirji, priit~a, bindu, Skt.; rtsa, rlung, thig le, Tib.). 
These are aspects of the subtle physical body. The channels are pathways 
through which the winds, or currents of energy, flow. The drops, or spheres, 
ride on the winds. 
coeme.rgent wisdom (sahajajftiina, Skt.; lhan cig skyes pa'i ye shes, Tib.). This term 
highlights the fact that wisdom arises together with ignorance; in other words, 
nirvana is simultaneous with samsara. All four terms have the same nature; 
seeing them as different comes from not recognizing this. 
completion stage (sampannakrama, Skt.; rdzogs rim, Tib.). The second phase of 
visualization practice, which follows the generation stage. All the conceptu­
alized images are dissolved back into the emptiness whence they came. More 
subtly, this stage can be divided into an aspect that has features, referring to 
the practice of channels, winds, and drops, and an aspect without features, 
referring to the practice of mahamudra. See also generation stage 
.4akini (Skt.; mkha' 'dro ma, Tib.). A feminine figure who ranges in meaning from 
a worldly deity with a variety of functions to an enlightened embodiment of 
wisdom. As one of the three roots (guru, yidam, and 4akini) in the Vajrayana, 
she is known as the source of activity. 
Dakpo Tashi Namgyal (Dwags po Bkra shis rnam rgyal 1512-87). A great Tibetan 
teacher who functioned as Gampopa's regent, Tashi Namgyal is famous for his 
text known as Moonbeams ofMahamudra (translated into English as Mahamu­
dra: The Quintessence of Mind and Meditation), in which he. combines discus­
sions of view and instructions on meditation into a manual that is also a treasury 
of quotations from philosophical treatises and advice on how to practice. 
denial (skur 'deps, Tib.). Literally, "to hurl abuse" in Tibetan, the term means to 
assume as nonexistent what does exist, for example, a self on the relative 
level. The term is also translated as "derogation" or "denigration." See also 
superimposition 
GLOSSARY 169 
dharmadhatu (Skt.; choJ dbyings, Tib.). The expanse of all phenomena, a syn­
onym for ultimate reality. It points to what the master Tilopa states in 
Mahamudra, The Ocean of Definitive Meaning: "From time without begin­
ning, the true nature of mind is like space./There is no phenomenon that is 
not included therein." 
dharmakaya. See kayas 
dharmata (Skt.; chos nyid, Tib.). Reality itself, another synonym for the ultimate, 
often used to indicate its presence as the empty nature of all phenomena, in 
other words, as embedded or enfolded within relative truth. See also two truths 
disturbing emotions (k!efa, Skt.; nyon mongs, Tib.). Among the different mental 
events, the disturbing emotions are listed as the six root afflictions of igno­
rance, aversion, excessive desire, pride, doubt, and wrong view. They are also 
presented as the five mental and emotional afflictions of ignorance, aversion, 
excessive desire, pride, and envy; these can be condensed into the three poi­
sons of ignorance, aversion, and excessive desire. 
doha (Skt. and Tib.). A spiritual song sprung from the deep experience of a real­
ized practitioner. The tradition can be traced back to the mahasiddhas of the 
eighth to the twelfth centuries in India and to its most famous Tibetan expo­
nent, Milarepa. The term is synonymous with "vajra song" (rdo rje g!u, Tib.). 
eight consciousnesses ({lffavijfziina, Skt.; rnam shes brgyad, Tib.). Mental pro­
cessing can be divided into eight aspects. Five consciousnesses are associated 
with the five sense faculties, known as visual, auditory, olfactory, gustatory, 
and tactile. The sixth (mental) consciousness operates with the data provided 
by the five sense faculties. The seventh (afflicted) consciousness interprets 
experience in terms of a personal sel£ The eighth, or all-basis, consciousness 
has two functions: it stores the traces of habitual patterns and, when the con­
ditions are right, gives rise to them. 
exaggeration. See superimposition 
father tantra (pha rgyud, Tib.). This aspect of tantric practice emphasizes skillful 
means. The generation stage practices focus on male deities, and the com­
pletion stage practice accentuates the illusory body. 
Foundational Vehicle (hinayiina, Skt.; theg pa dman pa, Tib.). In the Tibetan 
context, it is understood as the part of the Buddhist heritage that focuses on 
170 A SONG FOR THE KING 
the rules and regulations for the ordained sangha and on the practice of lib­
erating oneself from the ocean of samsara. In general usage, the term often 
overlaps with Theravada, "the school of the elders," which is still practiced in 
Thailand, Burma, Sri Lanka, Laos, and Cambodia. 
four joys (dga' ba bzhi, Tib.). As joy passes down the central channel in increas­
ing levels of sub~ety, the four are known as: (I) joy, joined with seeing the illu­
sory nature of phenomena; (z) supreme joy, joined with seeing mindfulness 
and the nature of mind to be empty; (3) without joy, joined to freedom from 
attachment to joy; and (4) coemergent joy, which is beyond the intellect. These 
joys become part of the path when the practices of the subtle winds and chan­
nels are performed in concert with the recognition of mind's nature. 
four seals (mudrii, Skt.; phyag rgya, Tib.). In the context of Saraha's doha, they 
refer to the seal of phenomena, the seal of wisdom, the seal of commitment, 
and the great seal. They are correlated with the four symbols, the four joys, 
and the four samadhis. 
four stages. See four symbols 
four symbols (brda' bzhi, Tib.). A system of stages in the realization of 
mahamudra that is unique to Saraha. The first stage is mindfulness, followed 
by nonminding, the unborn, and beyond the intellect. See verses 29 to 33 
and their commentary for an explanation. For a discussion of nonminding, 
see Appendix 4· 
Gampopa (Sgam po pa, I079-II53). He began his practice in the Kadampa tradi­
tion of Atisa and then blended its focus on ethical behavior and a graduated 
path of practice together with the mahamudra instructions he received from 
Milarepa. Gampopa was one of Milarepa's two main disciples and founded 
the Kagyii monastic tradition. He also wrote The Ornament of Precious Lib­
eration, a comprehensive text on philosophy and meditation that is still widely 
studied. 
generation stage (utpattikrama, Skt.; bskyed rim, Tib.). The first phase of visual­
ization practice, in which the deity, arising out of emptiness, is brought to 
mind in vivid detail as a central focus while the deity's mantra is recited. See 
also completion stage 
guru yoga (b/a ma'i rna! 'byor, Tib.). Among the three roots of the guru, yidam, 
and gakini, the guru is considered the source of blessings. The practice of 
GLOSSARY 171 
guru yoga develops a deep connection with the teacher, which allows these 
blessings to flow as the mind of the disciple blends with the mind of the root 
teacher, who is seen as the embodiment of all buddhas. Guru yoga is the 
fourth and last of the special preliminary practices. 
Hevajra (Skt.; kye rdo rje, Tib.). This semiwrathful male deity is an important 
practice in the Kagyii and Sakya traditions and was the main yidam ofMarp,a 
the Translator. The condensed version of this tantra along with the Third 
Karmapa, Rangjung Dorje's Profound Inner Meaning and Mairreya's Supreme 
Continuum are considered the three major texts for practitioners in the Gyal­
wang Karmapa's tradition. 
inner heat (ca'Jf!iili, Skt.; gtum mo, Tib.). A practice of the subtle body which gen­
erates internal heat to burn up obscmations and confusion. One of the six 
yogas ofNaropa. 
Jamgon Kongtriil Lodro Taye (Jam mgon kong sprul blo gros mtha'yas, 1813-99). 
One ofTibet's great masters of meditation and scholarship, he played a cen­
tral role in the nineteenth-century renaissance ofTibetan spirituality, known 
as the rime, or nonsectarian, movement. His work helped to preserve many 
traditions in Tibet 
that were on the verge of extinction. Jamgon Kongtriil's 
most famous texts were known as the Five Treasuries. 
Kagyii (bka' brgyud, Tib.). "The Lineage of Oral Transmission"; one of the four 
major schools ofTibetan Buddhism (the others are the Nyingma, Sakya, and 
Gelug). It emphasizes the practice of meditation and, in particular, 
mahamudra. 
Karma Trinlepa (Karma 'phrin las pa, 1456-1539). A Kagyii poet and scholar, his 
extensive commentary on Saraha's trilogy of doha elucidates the deeper lev­
els of meaning in the Songs for the People, the Queen, and the King and 
also serves as the primary source for a Tibetan history of Saraha's verses. 
Karma Trinlepa was the teacher of the Eighth Karmapa, Mikyo Dorje. 
Karmapa (Karma pa, Tib.). His name means "The One of Buddha's Activity" 
and he is also seen as the embodiment of compassion. His second incarna­
tion was recognized as the first tulku in Tibet, beginning a lineage that has 
included illustrious scholars, masters of meditation, and artists; it has con­
tinued down to the present day with his seventeenth incarnation, the Gyal­
wang Karmapa, Ogyen Trinley Dorje. 
172 A SONG FOR THE KING 
kayas (Skt.; sku, Tib.). In the Mahayana, full awakening is often described in 
terms of the kayas, meaning "bodies" or "dimensions of reality," which num­
ber two, three, four, or five. When they are two, they are the dharmakaya 
(dimension or body of truth) and the rupakaya (body of form). The dharma­
kaya is the perfect realization of mind's nature and replete with enlightened 
qualities; it is nonconceptual and synonymo'us with emptiness or omnis­
cience. When the kayas are three, the rupakaya is divided into the sambho­
gakaya (body of bliss or enjoyment) and the nirmaq.akaya (body of 
manifestation or emanation). Expressing the nature of radiant clarity, the 
sambhogakaya is visible only to bodhisattvas on the ten levels. It is adorned 
with the major and minor marks and further defined through the five cer­
tainties of time, place, teacher, retinue, and teaching. The nirmiiq.akaya is the 
fully awakened mind that manifests without impediment in a variety of forms 
and remains visible to ordinary beings; Sakyamuni Buddha is an example of 
a nirmiiq.akaya. When the kayas are four, the svabhavikakaya (body of the 
essential nature) refers to the inseparability of the other three. When the kayas 
are five, the mahasukhakaya (body of great bliss) refers to the blissful nature 
of the dharmakaya. See verse 38 for Saraha's version of the five kayas. 
lucidity (abhiisvara, Skt.; 'od gsa4 Tib.). Also translated as "radiant clarity" and 
"luminosity," the term refers to the ability of the mind to know, a quality 
that is utterly inseparable from its empty nature. 
maharnudra (Skt.; phya rgya chen po, Tib.). The Great (maha) Seal (mudra) is the 
supreme practice in the Kagyli lineage. Its practices lead to a recognition of 
the nature of the mind, which is often defined as the union of bliss and 
emptiness. Describing this practice in The Ocean of Definitive Meaning, the 
great Indian adept Maitripa (1012-97) states: "All phenomena are empty of 
self-essence. I The mind grasping them as empty is purified into its ground. 
I Free of intellect, with no object for the mind, I This is the path of all 
Buddhas." 
mahasiddha. See siddha 
Mahayana (mahayana, Skt.; thegpa chen po, Tib.). The "Great Vehicle" is a fur­
ther development of Buddhist thought and practice based on the Foun­
dational Vehicle, and focusing on compassion and emptiness. It is also 
known as the path of the bodhisattva. It can be divided irrto the 
Paramitayana (the Vehicle of the Perfections) and the Vajrayana. Without 
GLOSSARY 173 
its Vajrayana component, it is found mainly in China, Korea, and Japan. 
Within the system ofTibetan Buddhism, it is the second of three vehicles­
Hinayana, Mahayana, and Vajrayana-and is understood to function as the 
basis of the Vajrayana view and practice. 
Maitreya (Skt.; byams pa, Tib.). As the next and fifth buddha, Maitreya resides 
in Tu~ita Heaven. It is from him thatAsanga received what are known as the 
Five Treatises of Maitreya. These constitute an imponant corpus of texts for 
the Buddhist traditions ofTibet. For Vajrayana practitioners, the most impor­
tant among the five is the Supreme Continuum, which presents the classic 
view of buddha nature. 
mara (Skt.; bdud, Tib.). The four maras are (1) the disturbing emotions (klefas), 
(2) the five aggregates (skandhas), (3) the children of the gods (devaputra), 
and (4) death (mrtyupati) or the Lord of Death {Yama). The Seventeenth 
Karmapa, Ogyen Trinley Dorje, explains that in 
general, the label "mara'' 
is given to what blocks a practitioner from attaining awakening or perfect 
liberation. 
Marpa (Mar palo tsii ba, 1012-97). Known as Marpa the Translator for his prodi­
gious work in bringing texts from India to Tibet. Among these were the teach­
ings on mahamudra and Marpa's thirteen tantras, which form the core of 
practice in the Kagyii lineage. A married yogi, he was a student ofNaropa and 
teacher of Milarepa. 
meditational deity. See yidam 
Middle Way school (madhyamaka, Skt.; dbu rna, Tib.). The Middle Way school 
of philosophy evolved from the thought of the great Indian scholar 
Nagarjuna. Its view focuses on the empty nature of all phenomena that allows 
for their dependent origination. Its reasonings radically cut through any ten­
dency to reify an object or a subject. Of its two main subschools, the Rang­
tong approach emphasizes ·the empty aspect of mind's nature, while the 
Zhentong approach emphasizes its clear and radiant aspect. Ultimately, the 
two are inseparable. 
Mikyo Dorje, the Eigh~ Karmapa (Mi bskyod rdo rje, 1507-54). A prolific and 
profoundly learned scholar whose works include subtle commentaries on the 
major treatises of the Buddhist tradition and pithy instructions on the tantras. 
A great meditation master, he composed individual and group practice liturgies; 
174 A SONG FOR THE KING 
as a visionary artist, he developed the Karma Gardri (Ka rma sgar bris) style, 
one of the most important schools of thangka painting. 
Milarepa (Mi Ia ras pa, 1040-II23). One of the main students of Marpa, he is 
famous as the poet yogi ofTibet. His spiritual songs cover the range of prac­
tice and experience, while his life story with all its hardships and ultimate 
success still inspires. Among his many realized disciples was Gampopa. 
mother tantra (ma rgyud, Tib.). This form of tantric practice emphasizes wis­
dom. The generation stage practices focus on female deities, and the com­
pletion stage accentuates clear light. 
mudra (Skt.; phya rgya, Tib.). The term can mean "seal," "gesture," or "symbol." 
In Saraha's A Song for the King, it refers to the four seals. 
Nagarjuna (Skt.; Klu sgrub, Tib.). An Indian master who lived around the second 
century c.E. The Middle Way school bases its philosophy on his famous trea­
tise elucidating emptiness, The Fundamental Wisdom of the Middle ~y. 
Naropa (956-1040). A famous scholar turned siddha, Naropa passed through 
twelve minor and twelve major hardships set by his teacher, Tilopa, and finally 
attained full awakening. He is renowned for creating the practice of six yogas 
and was the teacher ofMarpa, who carne from Tibet to study with him at Pul­
lahari in India. 
nirm3.I].akaya. See kayas 
oral instructions (upadefa, Skt.; man ngag, Tib.). Also translated as "key instruc­
tions," they are practical, pithy, and easily kept in mind. These teachings were 
often written down; nevertheless, they manage to maintain their original 
flavor of personal advice, derived from the experience of a master and given 
directly to the disciple. 
passing experience (nyams, Tib.). In the mahamudra tradition, this refers to three 
types of temporary meditative experience-bliss, clarity, and nonthought­
which appear as one practices along the path. They are indications that one 
has been meditating, but should not be allowed to fall into ego's domain or 
be grasped as real and solid. 
path of liberation (grot lam, Tib.). This path emphasizes practices that work 
directly with the nature of mind. The term is paired with the path of method. 
GLOSSARY 175 
path of method (thabs lam, Tib.). This path emphasizes relative-level practices, 
such as the generation and completion stages and the six yogas ofNaropa. It 
should be practiced together with, and based upon, the path of liberation. 
perfections (piiramitii, Skt.; pha rol tu phyin pa, Tib.). Also translated as "tran­
scendent perfection," or more literally, "gone to the other shore," since by 
practicing them, one is carried across to the far shore of samsara and into lib­
eration. As six, they are: generosity, discipline, patience, joyful diligence, sta­
ble contemplation, and deeper knowing or wisdom. As ten, four more are 
added: skillful means, aspiration, strength, and primordial wisdom. They 
constitute the bodhicitta of engagement and, along with meditation on the 
nature of the mind, form the path of a bodhisattva's practice. 
prajiia (Skt.; shes rab, Tib.). A deeper knowing or wisdom that sees beyond the 
surface to a more profound reality, which can be seeing the impermanence of 
all phenomena or, more deeply, mind's nature itself. In dialectics, deeper 
knowing is traditionally defined as the faculty of the mind that is able to dis­
tinguish between relative and ultimate truths. See two truths 
Prajiiaparamita (Skt.; shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa, Tib.). The term refers to the 
corpus of texts on emptiness and compassion that constitute the central teach­
ings of the Mahayana. It also refers to the perfection (piiramitii) of wisdom 
(prajfiii) and to the Great Mother, the embodiment of wisdom, who is con­
sidered the mother of all buddhas. 
Rangjung Dorje, the Third Karmapa (Rang byung rdo rje, 1284-1339). He stud­
ied all the teachings brought to Tibet, in particular the Nyingma Great Per­
fection tradition, which he united with the Kagyi.i mahamudra teachings. A 
prolific author, he wrote many influential treatises, among which the Pro­
found Inner Meaning remains an important key to Vajrayana practice. 
riipa.kaya. See kayas 
sadhana (Skt; sgrub thabs, Tib.). A tantric practice for realizing the nature of a par­
ticular deity, who is the focus of the text. It usually begins with the prelimi­
naries of taking refuge and generating bodhicitta, then moves to the main 
section of visualizing the deity and reciting its mantra, and closes with dis­
solution of the image and dedication. 
samadhi (Skt.; ting nge 'dzin, Tib.). A meditative stabilization that involves 
undistracted, deep concentration when the practitioner's attention is 
176 A SONG FOR THE KING 
exceptionally clear and focused one-pointedly. Many different kinds of 
sarnadhis are described in the sutras. In A Song for the King, four are empha­
sized: the samadhi of the lion's play (verse 30); the sarnadhi that realizes all 
appearances to be like an illusion (verse 31); the samadhi of the hero's stride 
(verse 32); and the vajralike sarnadhi (verse 33). 
sarnatha (Skt.; gzhi gnas, Tib.). Common to most Buddhist schools, this is a med­
itation practice of bringing one's mind into sustained tranquility. The Tibetan 
literally means "calm abiding." Through repeated practice, distractions are 
stilled and the mind is able to abide wherever it is placed. Calm abiding is the 
basis for the practice of vipasyana, or deeper insight. 
sambhogakaya. See kayas 
samsara (sarrzsara, Skt.; 'khor ba, Tib.). Also translated as "cyclic existence," where, 
due to basic ignorance, one circulates birth after birth through the three 
realms (desire, form, and formless) or through t}le six types of rebirth (as a hell 
being, hungry ghost, animal, human, demigod, or god). Birth, old age, sick­
ness, and death are the forms of suffering particular to human birth; all types 
of suffering are transcended when the nature of mind is fully realized. 
secret mantra (gsang ngag, Tib.). A synonym for the Vajrayana. 
siddha (Skt.; grub thob, Tib.). "One who has attained accomplishment," or an 
enlightened master in the Vajrayana tradition. The eighty-four mahasiddhas 
("great masters"), including Saraha, Tilopa, and Naropa, were Indian adepts 
who followed very diverse lifestyles both while attaining realization and sub­
sequently in their teaching methods. 
siddhi (Skt.; dngos grub, Tib.). Usually translated as "accomplishments," they are 
divided into ordinary or supreme. The ordinary siddhis refer to mundane 
powers such as clairvoyance, and the supreme siddhi is complete and full 
enlightenment. 
six yogas ofNaropa (Na ro chos drug, Tib.). They belong to the path of method 
and consist of four major practices: (r) inner heat (gtum mo); (2) illusory body 
(sgyu lus); (3) dream yoga (rmi lam); and (4) clear light ('od gsal). The two 
adjunct practices are (5) transference of consciousness ('pho ba) and (6) the 
intermediate state (bar do). 
GLOSSARY 177 
skillful means (upaya, Skt.; thabs, Tib.). Meditation practice has two wings: skill­
ful means and wisdom or, respectively, compassion and emptiness. Skillful 
means refers to compassionate activity and. the great variety of ways to train 
in it. 
sugatagarbha (Skt.). The Tibetan, bde gshegs snying po, literally means "the heart 
essence of the One Gorie to Bliss." It is also translated as buddha nature. 
superimposition (sgro 'dogs, Tib.). Literally, "to attach feathers." The term means 
to assume that something exists that does not, for example, a permanent and 
autonomous self. The term is also translated as "conceptual overlay," "exag­
geration," and "overestimation." See also denial 
sutra (mtra, Skt.; mdo, Tib.). Refers to the second of the three sections (the Vinaya, 
Sutra, and Abhidharma) of the tripitaka, the early compilation of Sakyamuni 
Buddha's teachings. More generally, a sutra is a text containing the discourses 
of Sakyamuni Buddha or those inspired by him. Sutras are often in the form 
of a dialogue between the Buddha and a disciple concerning a particular topic. 
Within discussions of philosophical view, the sutra approach refers to a grad­
ual path to enlightenment, as distinguished from the swift path of the 
Vajrayana. 
svabhavikakaya. See kayas 
tantra (Skt.; rgyud, Tib.). Usually translated as "continuum" or "thread," the term 
refers to the esoteric teachings and practices given by the Buddha in his sam­
bhogakaya form. Tantra is synonymous with the Vajrayana and can also refer 
to a text that presents these teachings or practices. The translation "contin­
uum" points to the continuity of mind's nature in the beginning as the 
ground, in the middle along the path as it is being discovered, and at the end 
when it fully manifests as the fruition. 
three vehicles (triyana, Skt; theg pa gsum, Tib.). These refer to the three paths 
taken by three types of practitioner: the hearer (fravaka, Skt.), the solitary sage 
(pratyekabuddha, Skt.), and the bodhisattva. According to Mahayana teach­
ings, practitioners belonging to the first two vehicles of the hearers and soli­
tary sages will eventually enter the path of the bodhisattva and thereby attain 
complete and full awakening. In English, the three vehicles also refer to the 
Hinayana, the Mahayana, and Vajrayana. 
178 A SONG FOR THE KING 
Tilopa (988-1069). Indian mahasiddha who received the teachings directly from 
Vajradhara and became the first lineage holder of the Kagyii tradition. Tilopa 
passed these teachings to Naropa, who transmitted them to Marpa, who in 
turn gave them to Milarepa. Tilopa is known for attaining mahamudra real­
ization while pounding sesame seeds and for his doha, "The River Ganges 
Mahamudra." 
twelve deeds of the Buddha (mdzad pa bcu gnyis, Tib.). Though Buddhas are 
considered already enlightened, they perform twelve deeds for the sake of 
their disciples: (r) descending from the heaven ofTu~ita where he had resided; 
(z) entering the womb of his mother, Mayadevi; (3) taking birth; (4) becom­
ing skilled in worldly arts and demonstrating physical prowess; (5) taking 
pleasure in the retinue of his queen and consorts; (6) turning away from the 
world; (7) practicing asceticism; (8) going to take his vajra seat under the 
Bodhi tree; (9) conquering the maras; (ro) becoming fully awakened; (n) 
turning the wheel of the Dharma teachings; and (rz) passing into nirvai].a. 
twelve links of dependent origination (pratityasamutptida, Skt.; rten 'brel bcu 
gnyis, Tib.). In general, these are the stages passed through as we cycle in sam­
sara; they can also refer to other processes, such as the arising of a thought: 
(r) ignorance, (z) karmic impulses, (3) consciousness, (4) name and form, (5) 
the six sources of consciousness, (6) contact, (7) feeling, (8) craving, (9) grasp­
ing, (10) becoming, (n) birth, and (u) old age and death . 
.two truths (dvisatya, Skt.; bden pa gnyis, Tib.). The relative truth and the ultimate 
truth are two levels of perception; one is dualistic and the other, beyond dual­
ity. Relative truth involves experience in terms of a subject and object; it is 
what appears to the confused mind of an ordinary being. Ultimate truth tran­
scends duality; it is a synonym for emptiness and clarity inseparable that 
appears to those who have realized mind's true nature. 
Vajradhara (Skt.; rdo rje 'chang, Tib.). Within the Vajrayana, this is a synonym 
for the complete realization of mind's nature. In general, Vajradhara is the 
name of the dharmakaya buddha, who is dark blue in color and holds a bell 
and vajra. He is important for the Kagyii lineage, as Tilopa is said to have 
received the Vajrayana teachings directly from him. 
Vajrayana (vajraytina, Skt.; rdo rje thegpa, Tib.). It is said that like a diamond, a 
vajra is able to cut through everything, and this quality makes it a symbol for 
the realization of mind's nature that cuts through all delusions of duality. 
GLOSSARY 179 
Yana means "vehicle" and so the term is often translated as "diamond vehi­
cle," a synonym for the tantric Buddhism that developed in India and came 
to Tibet, forming the core of its Buddhist practice. 
Vajrayogini !Skt.; rdo rye rnal 'byorma, Tib.). Embodying wisdom, she is a major 
form of female deity practice in the Kagyii lineage. Red in color, she stan~s 
in a dancing posture. Vajravarahi is based on a similar deity. 
valid cognition (pramarza, Skt.; tshad ma, Tlb). Traditionally, there are three types. 
Direct valid cognition refers to nonconceptual, unmistaken perception by 
the five sense faculties, by the mental faculty, by self-awareness, and by yogic 
experience. Inferential valid cognition refers to classes of valid proofs or rea­
sonings that lead to a developed understanding of mind's nature. Scriptural 
valid cognition refers to texts that are the authentic word of the Buddha. 
vipa5yana (Skt.; lhag mthong, Tib.). Often translated as "insight meditation'' or 
"deeper insight." Coming after the mind has been stabilized through the prac­
tice of samatha, deep insight involves seeing into the nature of mind itself. 
Wangchuk Dorje, the Ninth Karmapa (Dbangphyug rdo rye, 1556-1603). He 
is renowned for his three treatises on mahamudra: The Ocean of Definitive 
Meaning (the most extensive), Eliminating the Darkness of Ignorance (much 
shorter), and Pointing Out the Dharmakaya {a condensation of the core 
practices). 
yidam (Tib.). The fully awakened mind manifesting as the different forms of 
deities who represent its myriad qualities. Often translated as "chosen deity," 
it refers to the specific deity selected as the focus of one's practice. The yidam 
is known as the root of accomplishments, or siddhis. 

Bibliography 
Tibetan Works 
Dbang phyug rdor rje, Rgyal dbang Ka rma pa, Lhan cig skyes sbyor gyi zab khrid 
nges don rgya mtsho'i snyingpo phrin las 'od 'phro. Rumtek, Sikkim: Dharma 
Chakra Centre, n.d. 
Karma chags med. 'Phags pa thugs rje chen po'i dmar khrid phyag rdzogs zung Jugs 
gi nyams len snying po bsdus pa. From Gdam ngag mdzod, vol. Ta., ff. 1-12 
(roman 325-47). Delhi: Sechen Publications , 1999. 
Karma 'phrin las pa. Do ha skor gsum ti ka 'bring po sems kyi rnam thar ston pa'i 
me long. Kunzang Tobgyel, Thimphu , Bhutan: Druk Sherig Press, 1984. 
---. Rgyal po do ha'i ti ka 'bring po sems kyi rnam thar ston pa'i me long in Do 
ha skor gsum ti ka 'bringpo sims kyi rnam thar ston pa'i me long(roman 159-215). 
Published by Kunzang Tobgyel, Thimphu, Bhutan: Druk Sherig Press, 1984. 
Smen sdong mtsham pa. Byams smon 'grel chung byang chub bde lam. (The Prayer 
of Maitreya and An Easy Path to Enlightenment: A Short Commentary on the 
Aspiration Prayer of Maitreya.) Translated by Michele Martin. Kathmandu : 
Marpa Instirute for Translators, 1996. 
Saraha. Dohakoshagiti . Do ha mdzod gyi glu. Delhi: sDe-dge Bstan-gyur. Delhi 
Karmapae Chodhey Gyalwae Sungrab Partun Khang, 1982-1985, Rgyud 'grel 
(D2224), vol. Wi., ff. 70b-77a. (Referred to as A Songfor the People.) 
---. Dohakoshanamacaryagi ti. Do ha mdzod ces bya ba spyod pa'i glu. Delhi: 
sDe-dge Bstan-gyur. Delhi Karmapae Chodhey Gyalwae Sungrab Partun 
Khang, 1982-1985, Rgyud 'grel (D2263), vol. Zhi, ff. 26b-28b. (Referred to as 
A Song for the King.) The Tibetan Buddhist Resource Center holds digitally 
scanned images of this text. See www.tbrc.org and number W23703. 
English-Language Works 
Conze, Edward, ed. Buddhist Wisdom. New York: Vintage Spiritual Books, 2001. 
(Translations and commentaries of the Diamond Sutra and Heart Sutra.) 
181 
182 A SONG FOR THE KING 
Davidson, Ronald M. Indian Esoteric Buddhism: A Social History of the Tantric 
Movement. New York: Columbia University Press, 2002. 
Guenther, Herbert V., tr. Ecstatic Spontaneity: Saraha's Three Cycles of Doha. Fre­
mont, CA: Asian Humanities Press, 1993. 
---. The Royal Song o[Saraha: A Study in the History of Buddhist Thought. 
Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1969. Reprint, Taipei: SMC Pub­
lishing, 1992. 
Gyatso, Janet, ed. In the Mirror of Memory: Reflections on Mindfolness and Remem­
brance in Indian and Tibetan Buddhism. Albany: State University of New York 
Press, 1992. 
Jackson, Roger. Tantric Treasures: Three Collections of Mystical Verses from Buddhist 
India. New York: Oxford University Press, 2004. 
Linrothe, Rob. Holy Madness: Portraits ofTantric Siddhas. Chicago: Serinidia, 
2006. 
Nalanda Translation Committee, tr. The Rain ofWisdom: The Essence of the Ocean 
ofTrue Meaning. Boston: Shambhala Publications, 1989. 
Namgyal, Dakpo Tashi. ClarifYing the Natural State. Translated by Erik Perna 
Kunsang. Boudanath: Rangjung Yeshe Publications, 2001. 
---. Mahamudra: The Quintessence of Mind and Meditation. Translated by 
Lobsang P. Lhalungpa. Boston: Shambhala Publications, 1986. Revised edi­
tion, Boston: Wisdom Publications, 2006. 
Roerich, George N. The Blue Annals. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1949, 1976. 
Ruegg, David Seyfort. Buddha-Nature, Mind and the Problem of Gradualism in a 
Comparative Perspective: On the Transmission and Reception of Buddhism in 
India and Tibet. New Delhi: Heritage Publishers, 1992. 
Schaeffer, Kurtis R Dreaming the Great Brahmin: Tibetan Traditions of the Buddhist 
Poet-Saint Saraha. New York: Oxford University Press, 2005. 
Thrangu Rinpoche, Khenchen. Essentials of Mahamudra: Looking Directly at the 
Mind. Boston: Wisdom Publications, 2004. 
---. The Ninth Karmapa's "Ocean of Definitive Meaning. "Ithaca, NY: Snow 
Lion Publications, 2003. 
---. An Ocean of the Ultimate Meaning: Teachings on Mahamudra. Translated 
by Peter Alan Roberts. Boston: Shambhala Publications, 2004. 
---. The Ornament of Clear Realization: A Commentary on the Prajnaparamita 
by Maitreya. Crestone, CO: Namo Buddha Publications; and Auckland, New 
Zealand: Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal Charitable Trust Publications, 2004. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 183 
---. Pointing Out the Dharmakaya. Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion Publications, 
2003. 
Waddell, Norman, rr. Zen ~rds-for the Heart: Hakuin's Commentary on the Heart 
Sutra. Boston: Shambhala Publications, 1996. 
Wangchuk Dorje, the Ninth Gyalwang Karmapa. Mahamudra: The Ocean of 
Definitive Meaning. Translated by Elizabeth M. Callahan. Seattle: Nitartha 
International, 2001. 
A Brief Biography ofThrangu Rinpoche 
! • 
THRANGU RINPOCHE was born in Kham, Tibet, in 1933 and was recognized at age 
five as the incarnation of the previous Thrangu Tulku by the Sixteenth Karmapa 
and the Eleventh Situ Rinpoche. Entering Thrangu Monastery as a young boy, 
he studied reading, writing, grammar, poetry, and astrology, memorized ritual 
textS, and completed rwo preliminary retreats. At sixteen he began the study of 
the three vehicles of Buddhism while staying in retreat and received full ordina­
tion from the Karmapa at twenty-three . 
In 1959 Thrangu Rinpoche left Tibet for India at the time of the Chinese mil­
itary takeover. At thirty-five he took the geshe examination before 1,500 monks 
in India and was awarded the degree of Geshe Lharampa , the highest degree 
granted in the Gelugpa tradition. Subsequently he was named abbot ofRumtek 
Monastery, the Karmapa's seat in Sikkim, India, and became the personal teacher 
of the four principal Karma Kagyii tulkus. 
For years Thrangu Rinpoche has traveled and taught extensivel y, establishing 
centers in Europe, Asia, and North America. He· is also the abbot of Gampo 
Abbey in Nova Scoria, Canada. Rinpoche 's educational institutions in Nepal 
include a monastery, Thrangu Tashi Choling; a retreat center and monastic col­
lege at Namo Buddha; a school for the general education of lay children and 
young monks; and Thrangu Tara Abbey, which offers a full Dharma education 
for nuns. Vajra Vidya Institute, a beautiful monastic college in Sarnath, India, 
the site of the Buddha's first teaching, opened in 1999. Most recently, Rinpoche 
has established a retreat center for his Western students in Crestone, Colorado . 
In zooo Thrangu Rinpoche was appointed the personal tutor of the Seventeenth 
Karmapa , Ogyen Trinley Dorje. 
For more information about Thrangu Rinpoche and his activities, contact his 
website: www.rinpoche.com 
About the Translators 
MICHELE MARTIN has been a Buddhist practitioner for over thirty years. After 
receiving graduate degrees from Yale, she studied in Japan, India, and Nepal with 
masters of meditation and scholars, while also serving as an oral translator and 
editing Buddhist books. Her publications include Music in the Sky: The Life, Art, 
and Teachings of the 17th Karmapa Ogyen Trinley Dorje and translations from 
Tibetan texts on philosophy and meditation. She lives in the Catskill Mountains 
of upstate New York. 
PETER O'HEARN (Lama Yeshe Gyamtso) has completed two three-year retreats 
under the guidance of Kalu Rinpoche and is one of the most respected transla­
tors of the Kagyii lineage. He is a translator at Karma Triyana Dharmachakra, the 
seat of the Gyalwang Karmapa in the West, and travels widely as a translator for 
the main KagyU lamas. Among his published work are The Instructions of Gam­
popa and Precious Essence: The Inner Autobiography ofTerchen Barway Dorje. He 
lives with his wife and daughter in the Hudson Valley. 
About Wisdom Publications 
Wisdom Publications, a nonprofit publisher, is dedicated to making 
available authentic Buddhist works for the benefit of all. We publish 
translations of the sutras and tantras, commentaries and teachings of 
past and contemporary Buddhist masters, and original works by the 
world's leading Buddhist scholars. We publish our tid.es with the appre­
ciation of Buddhism as a living philosophy and with the special com­
mitment to preserve and transmit important works from all the major 
Buddhist traditions. 
If you would like more information or a copy of our mail order cat­
alog, please write or call us at this address: 
Wisdom Publications 
199 Elm Street 
Somerville, Massachusetts, 02144 USA 
Tel: (617) 776-7416 • Fax: (617) 776-7841 
www.wisdompubs.org • info@wisdompubs.org 
The Wisdom Trust 
As a nonprofit publisher, Wisdom Publications is dedicated to the pub­
lication of fine Dharma books for the benefit of all sentient beings and 
dependent upon the kindness and generosity of sponsors in order to do 
so. If you would like to make a donation to Wisdom please contact our 
Somerville office. 
Thank you. 
Wisdom Publications is a nonprofit , charitable 501(c)(3) organiz.ation and a part of the Foun­
dation for the Preservation of the Mahayana Tradition (FPMT). 


