

HIS EMINENCE 
THE FOURTH jAMGON KONGTRUL RiNPOCHE, 
LODRO CHOKYI NYlMA 

DJe SplRJCUAL SoN~ 
o~ LooRo DlA~e 
HIS EMINENCE 
THE THIRD ]AMGON KONGTRUL RJNPOCHE, 
KARMA LODRO CHOKYI SENGE 
Lhe SplRl'CUAL SoN~ 
o~ LooRo LhAUe 
by 
]AMGON KoNGTRUL, THE GREAT 
Commentary by 
KHABJE KHENCHEN THRANGU R.INPOCHE 
Originally Translated by 
SARAH HARDING 
Retranslated by 
CORNELIA WEISHAAR-GUNTER 
Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal Charitable Trust 
Publicatiom 
Ack1wwledgme1tt 
We would like to thank the many persons who helped make 
this book possible. First and foremost, Khabje Khenchen 
Thrangu Rinpoche for giving these profound teachings and 
Clark Johnson for his tireless work in collecting, preserving 
and making the teachings of Rinpoche avaiable. 
Also we would like to thank Lodro Zangpo who first 
transcribed, edited, and published this text in the Profound 
Path of Purity. Secondly, we would like to thank Sarah Harding 
who not only translated the original teaching, but then went 
back over a large part of the text correcting and editing it. 
Finally, we would like to thank Cornelia Weishaar-Gunter for 
her tremendous work in helping us with the translation. 
Cover photo. Thangka of Jamgon Kongtrul Lodro Thaye from a 
collection of the Jamgon Kongtrul Lab rang, currently displayed at the 
Rigpe Dorje Institute at Pullahari Monastery. 
Photo of the fourth Jamgon Kongtrul Rinpoche courtesy of Sangye. 
May this supreme, peerless teaching, 
The precious treasure of the Victorious Ones, 
Spread and extend throughout the world 
Like the sun shining in the sky. 
Copyright © 2008 
Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche & 
Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal Charitable Trust 
All rights reserved. No part of this book, either text or art, may be 
reproduced in any form, electronic or otherwise, without written 
permission from the Namo Buddha Publications or Thrangu Rinpoche. 
Published by Namo Buddha Publications 
1390 Kalmia Avenue, Boulder, CO. USA 
Tel.: (303) 449-6608 
E-mail: Clark@NamoBuddhaPublications.com 
Web site: www.NamoBuddhaPub.com 
and 
Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal Publications 
P.O. Box 6259, Wellesley St, Auckland, NZ 
Tel.: (649) 268 0786 
Email: inquiries@greatliberation.org 
Web site. www.greatliberation.org 
National Library of New Zealand Cataloguing-in-Publication Data 
Thrangu, Rinpoche, 1933-
The spiritual song of Lodro Thaye I by Jamgon Kongtrul, The 
Great; commentary by Khabje Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche; 
originally translated by Sarah Harding ; retranslated by Cornelia 
Weishaar-Giimher. 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
ISBN 978-1-877294-40-2 
I. Kon-sprul Blo-gros-mtha'-yas, :j:d 1813-1899. Song of 
LodroThaye. 2. Mahamudra (Tantric rite) 3. Meditation­
Buddhism. I. Weishaar-Giinter, Cornelia. II. Harding, Sarah, 
1951-III. Tide. 
294.3443-dc 22 
Note 
Tibetan words are given as they are pronounced, not spelled in Tibetan. Their 
actual spelling can be found in the Glossary ofTibetan words. 
We use the convention of using B.C.E. (Before Common Era) for "B. C." 
and C.E. (Common Era) for "A D." 
Table of Contents 
Foreword by Venerable Choje Lama Shedrup 11 
Preface by Clark johnson 13 
THE SoNG OF LoDRO THAYE 17 
INTRODUCTION 29 
CHAPTER 1 The Importance of the Lineage Lamas 29 
(verses 1 to 40) 
CHAPTER 2 The View in Mahamudra 45 
(verses 41-62) 
GROUND MAHAMUDRA 
CHAPTER 3 Ground Mahamudra 51 
(verses 63-121) 
PATH MAHAMUDRA 
CHAPTER 4 Path Mahamudra 75 
(verses 122-153) 
CHAPTER 5 Obstacles in the Practice of Mahamudra 89 
(verses 154-186) 
10 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
CHAPTER 6 Progress Through the Various Stages 99 
(verses 187-233) 
FRUITION MAHAMUDRA 
CHAPTER 7 Fruition Mahamudra 113 
(verses 234-273) 
APPENDIX 
The Six Realms of Samsara 127 
The Five Paths 128 
The Bodhisattva Levels 129 
Transforming Consciousness into Wisdom 130 
Notes 131 
Glossary ofTerms 141 
Glossary ofTibetan Terms 163 
Bibliography 167 
Index 169 
Forer.vord 
VEN. CHOJE LAMA SHEDRUP 
THE I<AGYU LINEAGE IS COMMONLY known as the practice lineage, 
as it is practice above all else that is emphasized. However, 
practice can only proceed correctly if one has a correct understanding 
of the view. The path and view of the Kagyu lineage is Mahamudra, 
which is the very essence and pith of all the teachings of Lord Buddha. 
What Mahamudra view refers to is the inseparability of all phe­
nomena and emptiness; the radiant display of mind. Realization of 
Mahamudra will bring about the ultimate benefit for oneself­
freedom from samsara and ultimate happiness-and the develop­
ment of all the qualities of one's potential, which is the ultimate 
benefit for others. 
Therefore what is most prized is the direct teachings that point 
out this view and the instructions that explain the path or means to 
realize it. Such instructions often come in the form of spiritual songs 
or dohas spontaneously composed by great siddhas who have realized 
Mahamudra, such as this doha from Jamgon Kongtrul Lodro Thaye. 
Generally, in order to fully understand dohas an explanation or 
detailed commentary is required. A correct transmission and explana­
tion can only come about from a being who has practiced and fully 
realized the meaning of such teachings. Such a being is Khabje 
Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche, a holder of the Kagyu lineage, who 
through his great compassion and wisdom has blessed us with this 
detailed line by line commentary. 
12 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
Although teachings on Mahamudra are often very pithy they are 
exactly what has been recommended and taught as most appropriate 
for people in these modern and often busy times, because they can be 
practiced by anyone in any circumstances. 
Therefore I pray that whoever reads these teachings is able to take 
them to heart and realize Mahamudra. May this merit be a cause for 
the long life and teachings of the great masters to flourish and remain 
for many eons benefiting limitless sentient beings. 
Choje Lama Shedrup 
Palpung Thubten Chokyi Ghatsal 
28 March 2008 
Preface 
CLARK jOHNSON, PH. D. 
TWO THOUSAND FIVE HUNDRED YEARS ago the Buddha began 
delivering a remarkable set of teachings. He taught that 
instead of relying on a god, one can attain true, permanent happiness 
by simply examining and working with one's own mind. This message 
is as true today as it was then; we are engulfed by materialism in our 
modern world, yet we are not any more happy or secure. The root of 
this unhappiness is that our mind keeps looking outside ourselves 
and grasping at external things trying to achieve some measure of 
happiness. This, however, is futile because to achieve any measure of 
mental stability or happiness, we must look inward. The Buddha 
taught looking inward is done through meditation. 
The fundamental meditation that is common to all schools of 
Buddhism is Shamatha and Vipashyana meditation. Thrangu 
Rinpoche has given extensive teachings on this form of meditation 
in his The Practice ofTranquility and Insight. 
There is another major kind of meditation which is fairly specific 
to the Vajrayana school of Buddhism and this is Mahamudra 
meditation. The Vajrayana branch of Buddhism was preserved in 
Northern India and was brought to Tibet in the eighth through 
twelfth centuries C. E. by a series of remarkable Tibetan translators. 
Instead of spending eons accumulating virtue and lifetimes studying 
the sutras, this meditation of Mahamudra involves examining the 
14 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
mind itself in what is called "looking directly at the mind." While this 
is a deceptively simple idea, it is an extremely complex and advanced 
form of meditation which requires years of working on developing an 
extraordinary clear and stable mind. This stability and clarity is 
developed through extensive Shamatha and Vipashyana practice. So 
we must realize that Mahamudra meditation and Shamatha and 
Vipashyana practice are inter-linked and complement each other. 
We may ask who has practiced this Mahamudra meditation? The 
answer is that it was most extensively practiced by a large number of 
ordinary and extraordinary people in India in the second through 
twelfth century. Some of these individuals' stories have been recorded 
under the title of The Eighty-four Mahasiddhas which may be found 
in Keith Dowman's Masters ofMahamudra. These mahasiddhas were 
cobblers, weavers, arrow makers and even pimps and kings who 
carried on their ordinary daily activities while they simultaneously 
practiced Mahamudra meditation and achieved complete 
enlightenment in one lifetime. What is so relevant to our age is that 
in the West most Buddhist practitioners lead very busy and 
demanding lives and do not have long periods to devote to Shamatha 
and Vipashyana meditation, but they can practice Mahamudra 
meditation while they are making a living and raising a family. 
Mahamudra meditation has been practiced in Tibet since the 
twelfth century and particularly by the Kagyu lineage of Tibetan 
Buddhism and has allowed thousands of individual meditators to 
reach enlightenment. This meditation oflooking at the mind as-it-is 
has also been practiced by Nyingma practitioners in the form of 
Dzogchen meditation with equal results. Those wanting to know 
more about Mahamudra meditation can consultThrangu Rinpoche's 
book, Essentials of Mahamudra. 
A major difference between the traditional sutra and the 
Mahamudra approach is that the understanding of, for example, 
PREFACE 15 
emptiness in the Mahayana is achieved by studying and contemplating 
and debating a series of texts on the Prajnaparamita which were 
written in India by great scholars. The texts on Mahamudra, on the 
other hand, were often written by highly accomplished siddhas who 
would explain their realization of years and years of Mahamudra 
meditation in brief spiritual songs called dohas. These dohas, often 
only a few dozen lines long, are still sung by the lamas today. They 
often contain the most profound instructions in metaphors of great 
beauty derived from simple meditative experience. 
This SongofLodro Thaye is just such a doha and covers the entire 
path of Mahamudra in less than 300 lines of verse. This spiritual 
song was first translated into English in the Rain ofWisdom. However, 
the spiritual song is condensed in meaning so one needs someone 
accomplished in Mahamudra meditation to explain the meaning of 
this great work. Such a person is Thrangu Rinpoche who not only was 
asked to establish the curriculum of the Kagyu lineage after the Tibetans 
were forced into exile in 1959, but also taught the four major regents 
of the lineage including Jamgon Kongtrul's reincarnation. 
This particular book came about when Thrangu Rinpoche was 
asked to give teachings on Mahamudra at Gampo Abbey in Nova 
Scotia. Gampo Abbey is one of a few Buddhist monasteries in North 
America and Thrangu Rinpoche is its abbot. In October of 1989 
Thrangu Rinpoche gave this line-by-line commentary and it was 
first published in the Profound Path of Peace. Sarah Harding translated 
this teaching that Rinpoche gave and when it was decided to publish 
this book, she not only retranslated the original spiritual song based 
on the teaching given by Thrangu Rinpoche, but also went through 
the tapes of the teaching and retranslated and checked every word of 
the teaching. 
famgon Kongtrul Lodro Thaye 
The Song of Lodro Thaye 
by ]AMGON KONGTRUL THE GREAT 
1. Vajradhara, the illustrious one, 
2. Said to possess eight enlightened qualities 
3. Appears to me, an ordinary person, 
4. As a man called Padma, the protector, full of blessings. 
5. I supplicate you: never for a moment leave 
6. The eight-petaled lotus-dome of my heart. 
7. Though I am not graced with simultaneous liberation and 
realization, 
8. I am blessed with just recognizing my own true nature. 
9. Obsession with the eight worldly concerns has decreased. 
10. By mixing my mind with the guru's 
11. I have seen clearly that famous "luminous dharmakaya. " 
12. Non-thought was found amidst discursive thought 
13. Wisdom dawned within non-conceptualization. 
14. Delighted to become a lineage heir of the Dakpo Buddhas, 
15. I am moved to lift my voice in appreciation. 
16. From the dakini's secret treasure in Uddiyana in the Wt>st, 
17. The great siddha Tilo 
18. Opened the treasure chest of the three gems. 
19. At the monastery ofSplendid Ravishing Flowers in the North 
20. The learned great pandita Naropa 
21. Engendered the sign of attainment of inseparable prana-mind. 
18 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
22. In the valley of herbs, Drowolung, in the South, 
23. The translator, an emanation of Hevajra, 
24. Established the wellspring of all siddhas. 
25. In the Lachi snow mountains of the West 
26. The excellent being, Laughing Vajra, 
27. Attained the state of unity in one lifetime. 
28. In the pure land of Dvagla Gampo in the East 
29. The honorable doctor, the second Buddha, 
30. Actualized the samadhi of the tenth bodhisattva level. 
31. In the holy places of the body, speech, and mind centers, 
32. The many siddhas of the four great and eight lesser lineages 
33. Gained the essential power of Mahamudra 
34. And couldn't help but reach Buddhahood. 
35. Expert in the attracting power through bodhichitta, 
36. They couldn't help but bring benefit to beings. 
37. Having perfected the two accumulations, this profound 
attainment of wealth, 
38. They could not help but experience enjoyment. 
39. Developing the knowledge that "understanding one liberates all. " 
40. They couldn't help but fulfill their great prophecies. 
41. Children of parents who have accumulated much wealth 
42. Are naturally rich due to previous karma. 
43. Offspring of the white lioness and of the great garuda 
44. Are naturally fully developed with the power of their species. 
45. The followers of the lineage of Kagyu siddhas 
46. Meditate naturally from the strength of blessings. 
47. Boastfully counting the years of practice, 
48. Proud about dwelling in leisure, 
49. Puffed up over the exertions of sitting, 
50. Chauvinist in discriminating self above others, 
51. Keeping track of one's ordinary discursive thoughts, 
THE SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
52. Counting them to be the actual realizations on the paths 
and stages: 
53. Such are the distinctive characteristics of foolish 
meditators in this degenerate age. 
54. No siddha can be named who would be free of them 
55. But because of the fine oral instructions of the exemplary lineage 
56. The primordial wisdom of ultimate Mahamudra is seen. 
57. Foundation Mahamudra is understanding the nature, the view. 
58. Path Mahamudra is experiencing it, the meditation. 
59. Fruition Mahamudra is the realization of Buddhahood in 
one's mind. 
60. I am unworthy, but my guru is excellent. 
61. Even though born in the degenerate age, I have good fortune. 
62. In spite of little perseverance, the instructions are profound. 
63. What is foundation Mahamudra? 
64. It exists in two ways: the natural state and the state of confusion. 
65. It cannot be divided into samsara or nirvana, 
66. And it is devoid of the extremes of adding on or taking away. 
67. Not created by a cause, not altered by conditions, 
68. Confusion does not make it worse. 
69. Realization does not improve it. 
70. Confusion is not experienced, nor is it liberation. 
71. Since its essence cannot be established in any way, 
72. Its expression is unimpeded and can appear in any way. 
73. Encompassing all ofsamsara and nirvana, it is like space. 
74. Confusion or liberation, it is the basis of all 
75. Self-illuminating, knowing, capable of manifestation. 
76. With the foundation consciousness 
77. Being neutral, it has a cognizing aspect. 
78. Empty in essence, its nature is luminous. 
79. [Emptiness and luminosity] are inseparable, the heart essence 
is awareness. 19 
20 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
80. Unidentifiable as anything, it [resembles} space. 
81. It is immaculately clear, crystal jewel. 
82. It is self-knowing, self-illuminating, like the brilliance of a 
butter lamp 
83. Inexpressible, it is (like} the experience of a mute. 
84. Unveiled, it is splendid transcendent wisdom. 
85. Clear light, dharmakaya, sugatagarbha, 
86. It is pure from the beginning and spontaneous. 
87. Nobody can prove it by the use of examples, 
88. No words can express it. 
89. The dharmadhatu cannot be examined by logic. 
90. This is laid down right at the beginning 
91. One should dissipate all doubts. 
92. Maintaining meditation sustained by the view 
93. Is like a garuda soaring to the sky. 
94. Devoid of any fear or doubt 
95. Meditation without the view 
96. Resembles a blind person entering a plain 
97. There is no way to determine the correct path 
98. If we have the view but cannot meditate 
99. It is like a wealthy person consumed with avarice: 
100. It does not yield results for himself and others 
101. Practicing the union of both is the authentic view. 
102. This neutral state has an ignorant aspect, 
103. Which for five reasons, one does not recognize one's own face. 
104. The ocean of co-emergent ignorance, 
105. Is set in motion by waves of confused ego-clinging 
106. Awareness becomes the "!"and its own luminosity becomes 
the objects. 
107. The imprints of subject and object become solid. 
108. So that karma is accumulated and brought to fruition 
THE SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
109. The water wheel of samsara turns continuously. 
110. While {samsara] is turning, its essence remains immaculate. 
111. At the very instance of appearing, it [appearances] is devoid 
of true reality. 
112. just appearance, they are the brilliance of the three kayas 
113. The nature of their arising is unborn. 
114. The unborn cannot be obstructed. 
115. Between these two, there is no abiding. 
116. From this mind itself. so hard to describe, 
117. The various displays ofsamsara and nirvana arise. 
118. Seeing them as self-liberating is the highest view. 
119. If it is recognized, all is suchness. 
120. If there is nothing to refote or establish, it is the innate state. 
121. When conceptual mind is transcended, there is the ultimate. 
122. Path Mahamudra refers to 
123. The Mahamudra of mind itself and the Mahamudra of 
apparent existence. 
124. Spontaneous mind is the dharmakaya. 
125. Spontaneous appearances are the light of the dharmakaya. 
126. When the blessings of the glorious lamas 
127. And one's own karmic dispositions come together 
128. One sees one's own face as if meeting an old acquaintance. 
129. Endless explanation is useless, 
130. The beginner needs a starting point. 
131. Don't welcome or dwell on thoughts of past and foture. 
132. In each moment, there is the mind of nowness. 
133. In the continual, innate state 
134. There is not the slightest thingfor mind to meditate on, 
135. Or for getting lost for a moment in the confosion of wandering 
thought. 21 
22 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
136. {For the mind to be} Without distraction, without meditation 
or fabrication is essential, 
137. Fresh, relaxed and naturally clear. 
138. In the space of the three doors of freedom, 
139. Carefully establish mindfulness and awareness. 
140. The balance of mind between tight and loose must always 
be kept. 
141. Thus subtle, gross and strong thoughts will be pacified. 
14 2. Remain in the state of natural, uncontrived mind. 
143. Gradually, the four grades of experience will arise. 
144. The sun of luminosity will continuously shine 
145. And the root of Mahamudra meditation will have been planted 
146. If it is lacking, talk of higher realization 
147. Resembles building a castle without a foundation. 
148. Yet being too attached to it is an activity of mara. 
149. Those who have studied little, but apply great e./fort 
150. Are often seduced by seeming virtues, 
151. Guiding themselves and others to the lower realms. 
152. Bliss, clarity, and non-thought may be wonderful experiences, 
153. But they are causes of samsara if one clings to them 
154. Having hammered the nail of devotion into your heart 
155. When rock hits bone in natural awareness 
156. The ultimate lineage of blessing is transferred. 
157. Not getting lost in the four types of deviations, 
158. Not falling into the three errors, 
159. Surpassing the four joys, free from the three conditions, 
160. And connecting with the three ways of arising, 
161. we won't be troubled by the mind of the three great ones. 
162. The self-arisen nature is not changed by experiences. 
163. It resembles the center of a cloudless sky. 
164. Self-aware, self-illuminating, it can't be put in words. 
THE SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
165. It is primordial wisdom beyond analogy or concepts. 
166. The nakedness of ordinary mind 
167. Without anything to understand or to boast about, 
168. Is clearly seen as the dharmakaya. 
169. The six sense objects appear like the moon in water, 
170. In the sphere of primordial wisdom. 
171. Whatever arises is unfobricated, the innate state. 
172. Whatever is perceived has the nature of Mahamudra. 
173. The phenomenal world is the great bliss of the dharmakaya. 
174. Meditation finding naturally its own place is Shamatha, 
175. Seeing the unseeable nature is Vipashyana 
176. In all phases of stillness, movement and awareness 
177. These two are not separate, but coincide. 
178. The confusion of discursive thought is not to be abandoned 
179. The virtuous action of the antidotes cannot be achieved. 
180. The time will come when you arrive naturally at this state. 
181. When you are well established in this realization, 
182. You 'II never be outside of meditation 
183. At the borderline between freedom and attainment 
184. Even meditation itself has no existence. 
185. But beginners, whose discursive mind has not subsided 
186. Should highly cherish meditation. 
187. By means of meditation, experiences come up. 
188. Experiences arise as adornments of awareness. 
189. If one wants to divide the path, there are four yogas: 
190. Knowing mind's own face is "one-pointedness" 
191. And has lesser, intermediate and greater stages. 
192. Seeing bliss and luminosity in alternation, 
193. Obtaining mastery over the concentration of meditative 
equipoise. 
194. And uninterrupted experience of luminous appearances. 23 
24 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
195. Realizing the rootlessness of mind is "no elaboration" 
196. And has lesser, intermediate, and greater stages: 
197. Realizing that arising, ceasing and abiding are empty, 
198. Being free from the fundamental root of clinging to appearances 
or clinging to emptiness, 
199. And cutting through all exaggerations caused by elaborating 
on phenomena. 
200. Mixing appearances and mind is "one-taste" 
201. And has lesser, intermediate, and greater stages: 
202. Mixing the dharmas of the two kinds into one equal taste. 
203. Appearances and mind become like water poured into water. 
204. And many types of primordial wisdom arising from one taste. 
205. The complete purification of rigid mind is "non-meditation" 
206. And has lesser, intermediate and greater stages: 
207. Being free from all ideas of meditation and meditator. 
208. Gradually purifying the imprint of the veils of knowledge 
209. And the mixing of the mother and child clear light. 
210. The primordial wisdom of the dharmadhatu pervades space. 
211. In short, as for as meditation is concerned: 
212. If the mind can dwell according to our wishes, this is 
one-pointedness. 
213. One then sees the face of ordinary mind. 
214. Realizing that there is no foundation is "no elaboration. " 
215. Liberating all dualistic perception 
216. In awareness is "one-taste. " 
217. Transcending all conventional terms of meditating or 
not meditating, 
218. The imprints are ended. This is "non-meditation. " 
219. Those on the level of the great yo gins, 
220. Starting with Naropa and Maitripa, 
221. Down to my venerable lama Pema Wangpo, 
THE SONG OF LODRO THAYE 25 
222. Those belonging to the golden garland of the Kagyu 
223. Have gone to the dharmakaya kingdom of non-meditation, 
224. They have purified the darkness of the two veils in the dhatu 
225. Extended the great skill of the two kinds of knowledge 
226. And opened the treasury that pervades space for the benefit 
of others. 
221. They remain as a refuge beyond doubt. 
228. The ora/lineage has been passed from one to another 
229. This means that it is not just words, but the meaning 
that counts. 
230. Even though I am an undisciplined, vile ordinary person 
231. As I am holding the sign of your noble lineage, 
232. Please lead me quickly to the kingdom of non-meditation. 
233. Kind ones, please completely purify my rigid mind in the dhatu. 
234. Fruition Mahamudra is concerned with 
235. The ground is introduced as one's own foce, the innate three 
kayas; 
236. The path consists in concentrating on the view and meditation; 
237. And the fruition is the manifestation of the immaculate 
three kayas. 
238. The dharmakaya is the basis, emptiness without any elaboration. 
239. The sambhogakaya is its brilliance, the naturally luminous. 
240. The nirmanakaya is the unceasing play of various manifestations 
241. Encompassing all things, 
242. The nature of Mahamudra is coincidence. 
243. The realm of dharmas free from accepting or rejecting. 
244. Possessing the beauty of unconditioned bliss, 
245. It is the great and vast wealth of wisdom. 
246. It is the natural form of kindness transcending thought. 
247. Because of wisdom, one does not stay in samsara 
248. Because of compassion, one does not stay in nirvana 
26 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
249. Activities are spontaneously accomplished without effort. 
250. The luminosities of ground and path, combine like mother 
and child. 
251. Ground and fruition will be joined together 
252. Buddhahood is found in one's own mind. 
253. The treasure that fulfills all wishes is revealed 
254. E rna! What a great wonder! 
255. Regarding the view of Mahamudra 
256. Analysis cannot define it. 
257. Therefore, throw knowledge of mental constructions away! 
258. Regarding the meditation of Mahamudra 
259. Concentration on a thought cannot get through 
260. Therefore abandon artificial resting in meditative equipoise. 
261. Regarding the action of Mahamudra 
262. Rules do not apply. 
263. Therefore free yourself from notions of acting and not acting. 
264. Regarding the fruition of Mahamudra 
265. Nothing new can be attained. 
266. Therefore cast away hoping, fearing, and desiring. 
267. This is the profound intention of all Kagyupas. 
268. It is the only path used by all the Buddhas and bodhisattvas. 
269. It is the method to turn away the confused circle of existence 
210. It is dharma for obtaining Buddhahood in one lifetime, 
271. The heart essence of the sutra and tantra teachings. 
271. May I and all sentient beings reaching as for as space 
212. Simultaneously attain realization and be liberated. 
273. May we reach the supreme Mahamudra state. 
The Song of Lodro Thaye 
commentary by 
KHABJE I<HENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 

1 
The Importance of the 
Lineage Lamas 
IN THE WORDS OF THE BUDDHA or the sutras and the practices of 
Mahamudra it is especially important to supplicate the root and 
lineage lamas. It was said that it is most important to supplicate 
one's own root or main lama so that one will receive the blessings. 
The most important method to receive blessing is through devotion 
(Tib. mo gu). 
In the sutras of the Buddha, there were predictions stating that 
in later times when the dharma would degenerate, there would be 
ways to prevent the degeneration of the dharma and make it flourish. 
One prediction was that there would be a special individual named 
Lodro who would prevent or forestall this degeneration. It is said he 
would prevent the degeneration of the dharma "in five ways" 1 and 
make it flourish. This was foretold by the Buddha in the King of 
Samadhi sutra and elsewhere. 
The glorious, holy guru Lodro Thaye, also called KarmaN gakwang 
Yonten Gyatso, after having accomplished the realization of 
Mahamudra composed this spiritual song (Skt. doha, Tib. gyur). It is 
entitled, The Self-Arising Innate Song upon Acquiring a Mere Glimpse of 
Certainty in the View and Meditation of the Incomparable Dakpo Kagyu. 
This spiritual song discusses the practice of Mahamudra meditation. 
30 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
The most important aspect of this practice is the supplication of 
the root and lineage lamas. From the root guru one receives blessings. 
Most important in receiving blessings is to have devotion. Therefore 
the song begins by praising the lineage of these teachings. 
I. Vajradhara, the illustrious one, 
2. Said to possess eight enlightened qualities 
At the very beginning of this spiritual song, it says that Vajradhara 
was exceptional because he is endowed with eight special qualities. 
Vajradhara is the dharmakaya and therefore has the eight qualities or 
aspects. On the ordinary level these are of the five elements of ( 1) 
earth, (2) water, (3) fire, (4) air or wind, and (5) space, to which are 
added (6) red and (7) white elements from the mother and father 
and (8) consciousness.2 In the case of the dharmakaya Vajradhara, 
these are completely pure. 
In general, our experience is that our body consists of the eight 
elements. To us they appear to provide our vitality and life-force. 
But these substances are really a cause of bewildered appearances 
and keep us limited, unable to develop. For instance, the earth element 
gives us strength, the power of our body. But it is not vast so there is 
a limit to our physical strength because the earth element has a 
limiting quality. However, when the earth element is pure at the 
level of dharmakaya Vajradhara, then the siddhis and enlightened 
activities are unimaginable. Similarly, the water element gives us illness 
and experiences of happiness and sadness and so on. When it is 
completely pure at the level of a Buddha, however, it is naturally free 
from illness, sadness, and pain. The fire element gives us the ability 
to have bodily warmth and vigor, but it is not unlimited either. If it 
is pure, the dharmakaya and the sambhogakaya have the ability to 
radiate light unimaginable and vast throughout all the Buddha realms 
THE IMPORTANCE OF THE LINEAGE LAMAS 31 
with no limit. The wind element gives us the ability to move and 
perform activities and actions. But again this is not unlimited activity. 
On the level of the dharmakaya this purified element has the ability 
of endless, unimaginable miraculous powers. The space element adds 
a quality of lightness to our being and we would just kind ofimplode 
if we didn't have the space element as part of us. But still it is a 
restriction. In the purified aspect of dharmakaya, it makes complete 
and total unobstructed manifestation of everything possible. In 
addition to these five main elements there is a red element and a 
white element. The red element allows us to have a body: it allows for 
the development and existence of a body. But it does not have the 
power to emanate bodies. With the purification of the red element 
endless emanations of the body are possible. The white element gives 
us a feeling of happiness or bliss. This bliss is a very limited kind of 
bliss and is not the limitless bliss that is experienced when the white 
element is completely purified. The eighth element is consciousness 
which allows us to understand, to see, to hear, smell, taste, and so 
on. But essentially it is ignorant knowing in a limited way, that 
consciousness cannot know fully. When the element of consciousness 
is purified and wisdom (Skt. jnana, Tib. yeshe) arises, one attains the 
state of understanding all phenomena or omniscience. When these 
eight qualities are completely pure, then the enlightened activities of 
the dharmakaya of a Buddha are endless and boundless. 
3. Appears to me, an ordinary person, 
4. As a man called Padma, the protector, foil of blessings. 
Although Vajradhara is widely known as the dharmakaya 
possessed with these eight qualities, to Jamgon Kongtrul he doesn't 
appear in this way, but in a human form, i.e., his guru. Jamgon 
Kongtrul received all of the instructions and all the blessings from 
32 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
his root guru, the ninth Situ, Perna Nyingche Wangpo, and therefore 
he supplicates him as the lord named Padma who is endowed with 
the blessing. Jamgon Kongtrul had exceptional faith and devotion to 
his lama, Perna Nyingche Wan gpo, and regarded him as actually being 
Vajradhara. Even though he had human form, Jamgon Kongtrul 
thought that he actually was Vajradhara with all the eight qualities 
and so the qualities of devotion arose in his stream of being. We as 
disciples should do likewise by having absolute faith in our root 
lama so much so that we regard him or her as Vajradhara. Whether 
our lama is exceptionally learned or has extraordinary qualities or 
not, we should still think he or she is definitely Vajradhara. 
With sacred outlook or pure vision, Jamgon Kongtrul regarded 
his lama as Vajradhara even though he appeared to look like a human 
being. So Jamgon Kongtrul says, "To me he appears to be only a 
human, but in fact he is actually Vajradhara." In the same way, through 
our sacred outlook, we should regard our root lama without faults, 
and if there are no spiritual qualities, we should regard him or her as 
having spiritual qualities. With pure vision we should see the lama 
with faults as without faults, and the lama without good qualities as 
with good qualities. 3 
5. I supplicate you: never for a moment leave 
6. The eight-petaled lotus-dome of my heart. 
We should regard the lama as being Vajradhara with the eight 
qualities and also we should constantly keep in mind and pray one­
pointedly and supplicate the lama. It says that in one's heart, visualized 
in a tent of an eight-petaled lotus, there dwells the lama and the 
lama is there constantly. So not even for a second are we separated 
from the lama and so we can continuously recall the root lama. 
THE IMPORTANCE OF THE LINEAGE LAMAS 33 
In the practice of Mahamudra devotion is crucial. It is said in 
the Kagyu lineage prayer (Tib. Dorje Chang Thungma) that "devotion 
is the head of meditation." If someone doesn't have a head, they can't 
eat food, can't listen to anything, and can't see anything, and so on. 
But if they have a head, then they can eat and talk and see and hear. 
Devotion is like this because with devotion one develops one's 
meditation and then is able to receive the blessings of the lama. The 
method of bringing about devotion is supplication. That is why in 
Mahamudra practices, we rely on guru yoga as the method to develop 
devotion. Jamgon Kongtrul shows that he has devotion in this way 
and that we should also supplicate the lama and arouse devotion. In 
the case of Chogyam Trungpa Rinpoche, for instance, his guru yoga 
practice was a sadhana practice combining Karma Pakshi (the second 
Karmapa) and Dorje Trollo (the wrathful aspect of Guru Rinpoche) 
arising from his pure vision. 
7. Though I am not graced with simultaneous liberation and realization, 
8. I am blessed with just recognizing my own true nature. 
What are the benefits of supplicating and meditating on the lamas 
and arousing devotion? It is possible to attain realization and 
liberation, instantaneously, such as happened with King Indrabhuti 
who received the Mahamudra teachings, attained realization, and 
instantly became liberated at the same time. Jamgon Kongtrul says 
that he's not as fortunate as King Indrabhuti who attained realization 
and was liberated instantly through his devotion. However, through 
his devotion and meditation on the lama, Jamgon Kongtrul received 
enough blessing to understand the essence of his mind. 
9. Obsession with the eight worldly concerns has decreased. 
34 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
What is the sign that Jamgon Kongtrul understood something 
of the nature of his mind through the power of his supplication and 
devotion? First, his attention to and attachment to the eight worldly 
concerns has diminished. The eight worldly concerns are phenomena 
which contradict dharma and keep one from dharma practice. They 
are (I) to be happy with pleasing things and (2) to be displeased 
with unpleasant phenomena; (3) to be happy with wealth and 
prosperity; and (4) to be displeased when not having it; (5) to be 
happy with praise and (6) to be displeased when one is not praised 
or slandered; and (7) to be happy when one has fame and (8) unhappy 
when one is not well known. Having excessive attachment to these 
can be an obstacle to the practice of dharma. But if one practices 
dharma well, one's attachments are diminished. So Jamgon Kongtrul 
is saying although he has a small understanding of his own nature, 
based on the lama's blessing his tendency for attachment to the eight 
worldly concerns is diminished. 
10. By mixing my mind with the guru's 
11. I have seen clearly that famous "luminous dharmakaya. " 
This describes the result of his supplication, devotion, and 
understanding of his mind. Similarly, the next line "That famous 
'luminous dharmakaya'" is about the nature of clarity or luminosity 
(Tib. salwa) that everybody's heard so much about. Jamgon Kongtrul 
is saying, "I have seen it. I have realized it," through the kindness of 
his root lama, Perna Nyingche Wangpo. This was done in meditation 
by visualizing Perna Nyingche Wangpo on his head and receiving 
the four empowerments from him. In this visualization white, red, 
blue, and yellow light emanated from the four chakras (the forehead, 
the throat, the heart, and the navel) of his guru and entered into the 
four chakras of Jamgon Kongtrul. By meditating this way, he was 
THE IMPORTANCE OF THE LINEAGE LAMAS 35 
completely filled with light and received the four empowerments: 
the vase empowerment, the secret empowerment, wisdom 
empowerment, and the name empowerment. The blessings of body, 
speech, and mind entered. Then the entire being ofPema Nyingche 
Wangpo dissolved into light and melted into Jamgon Kongtrul 
making him and his guru inseparable. The mind of the guru and the 
mind ofJamgon Kongtrul completely mixed, which is called "mixing 
mind and mind." This practice is the combining of the lama's mind 
with one's own mind believing completely that one's mind is 
completely inseparable so that whatever qualities, realizations and 
experiences the lama's mind has are now one's own realization and 
experience. By just thinking and believing in this experience of the 
mixing of the minds, realization actually arises. Jamgon Kongtrul 
says, "Mind and mind mixing, I see it transparently." This means he 
saw the dharmakaya. Based on the teachings of mixing the lama's 
mind with one's own, he is saying that we also need to practice in 
this way. 
12. Non-thought was found amidst discursive thought 
13. Wisdom dawned within non-conceptualization. 
At first we are completely involved by many discursive thoughts, 
then gradually the thoughts clear away and we attain a state of non­
thought through this practice. Even though there are many thoughts, 
with practice we develop the beginning of non-thought and the result 
of that development of reduced thought is that pristine wisdom 
gradually dawns. 
14. Delighted to become a lineage heir of the Dakpo Buddhas, 
15. I am moved to lift my voice in appreciation. 
36 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
Having first met and supplicated Perna Nyingche Wangpo, 
Jamgon Kongtrul was able to enter into the teachings of the Dakpo 
Kagyu and able to do these practices. 4 Through his devotion and 
supplication and receiving these blessings and receiving the 
indications of the blessings, Jamgon Kongtrul Rinpoche feels like a 
child of the lineage, a possessor, or almost successor, of this lineage, 
and realizing this he is extremely pleased and very happy and joyful. 
So Jamgon Kongtrul made supplications to the lama, and based 
on the supplications he received blessing, then through the blessing 
realization dawned. After attaining realization he reflected on how 
realization had arisen due to faith and how one needs to mix one's 
mind with the lama's, and how if one doesn't, then experience and 
realization won't arise. It was not really enough for these experiences 
to have arisen in him alone, so he explains this to everybody so that 
they will receive the blessing of the lama and practice in this same 
way. Then the desire to compose this song arose in him. 
16. From the dakini's secret treasure in Uddiyana in the West, 
17. The great siddha Tilo 
18. Opened the treasure chest of the three gems. 
Up to this point Jamgon Kongtrul has been talking about his 
root lama and the benefits of the practice of the lama. After describing 
the great blessing of the root lama, he goes on to describe the lineage 
lamas who are the source of these powerful oral instructions and 
practices. "In Uddiyana in the West" is a poetic devise in which "West" 
means west to Bodhgaya in India. As described in the spiritual 
biography of Tilopa, he traveled miraculously to Uddiyana, the 
dakini's land and received three special or pith instructions from 
Uddiyana and these are the Three Gems (Tib. norbu sum) ofTilopa. 
The first special instruction ofTilopa was the "wish-fulfilling jewel 
THE IMPORTANCE OF THE LINEAGE LAMAS 37 
oflineage," the second "the wish-fulfilling jewel of maturation," and 
the third "the wish-fulfilling jewel of the path of liberation." The 
first jewel deals with the instructions, supplication, and devotion in 
the guru yoga practice. The second one explains the Six Yogas of 
Naropa, for developing the channels, winds, and energies 5 in order 
to attain liberation. The third path of liberation is Mahamudra 
practice which doesn't involve practice of the channels, winds, or 
energies, but involves meditating naturally in samadhi, and based on 
this meditation, realization arises. 
So, the founder of the Kagyu lineage, Tilopa, brought from 
Uddiyana, from Chakrasamvara, and from Vajradhara these special 
instructions called the Three Gems. 
Of the two approaches (the path of method and the path of 
liberation), the path of liberation is doing very hard meditation and 
the path of method is employing various means for developing the 
life-giving energy of the body or the prana. When one has some 
control over the prana by being able to restrict or bind it, the 
experience of heat arises. With the experience of heat, the experience 
of bliss arises. With the experience of bliss, one's realization and 
experience becomes clearer and clearer. When this clarity is attained 
through the path of method, eventually wisdom or prajna will dawn. 
19. At the monastery of Splendid Ravishing Flowers in the North 
20. The learned great pandita Naropa 
21. Engendered the sign of attainment of inseparable prana-mind. 
The second holder of the Kagyu lineage is Naropa. He is in the 
north in a place called "Illustrious, Seductive Flowers" which in 
Sanskrit is "Pupahari." The north here indicates the University of 
Nalanda, a very important and special place where the Buddhadharma 
flourished. Here Marpa first met Naropa and received many 
38 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
teachings. There the learned one, the great pandita Naropa, displayed 
signs which indicated that he was a siddha whose prana and mind 
had become inseparable. This sign results from the exceptional 
practice of the Six Yogas ofNaropa. 6 
Normally, "subtle wind" which is called prana in Sanskrit or lung 
in Tibetan is pretty much synonymous with breath. We think of 
prana as the inhalation and exhalation of breath, moving in and out 
with the body. This is our feeling or experience of prana. What we 
call "mind" is the movement of discursive thought that we perceive. 
There are two kinds of prana. On the grosser level it seems simply 
that prana is this feeling of the body inhaling and exhaling. But on a 
closer examination, prana is the moving of the mind which creates 
the feeling of prana. The mind and thoughts are connected with the 
prana because they are both moving. We believe inhalation is one 
thing and our thought process is another. But in fact they are 
inseparable. For instance, the feeling of lung, the feeling of wind 
being exhaled and inhaled, is actually just a perception of mind. If 
we try to locate exactly where this prana is by asking, "Is it in our 
body? Is it outside our body? and so on, we simply can't find it 
solidly existing like a typhoon. The exhalations and inhalations are 
mental phenomena. 
The experience of the inseparability of prana and mind begins 
to happen with the practice of subtle heat (Tib. tummo) in which we 
are working on our breath, particularly holding the breath. When 
we hold the breath we start to notice that the mind also stays. Then 
the physical obscurations are cleared and bliss is generated. When 
this happens, there is more and more clarity and insight into the 
nature of mind. This engenders the realization of the inseparability 
of mind and prana. By changing the mind we can change the prana, 
by changing the prana we can change the mind. This is why there are 
so many meditations based on the breath; they show this inseparability 
THE IMPORTANCE OF THE LINEAGE LAMAS 39 
of mind and breath. In the beginning of tranquility (Skt. Shamatha) 
meditation we focus on our exhalation and inhalation. By calming 
the breath, we calm the mind and less thoughts arise. All the way 
up to the practice of subtle heat where we hold the breath and 
cultivate the prana, we meditate on breath. Even in the visualization 
practice ofVajrayogini, the vajra recitation of this practice is based 
on the breath. 
22. In the valley of herbs, Drowolung, in the South, 
23. The translator, an emanation of Hevajra, 
24. Established the wellspring of all siddhas. 
The next lineage holder is Marpa Lotsawa. The line, "In the 
valley of herbs, Drowolung, in the South" means that it is a very 
isolated area where many different plants and medicinal herbs grow 
which wouldn't grow in populated areas. So this really means in the 
wilderness. Marpa (who came from the Trowo valley in Tibet) was 
actually an emanation ofHevajra and being an emanation ofHevajra, 
his main activity was to translate books from the Indian languages 
into Tibetan. He is called a lotsawa, which means "a translator." He 
stayed in Trowolung which was an isolated place but the "wellspring 
of all siddhas" means that although it was isolated, many disciples 
came and because the special teachings were so profound, they 
attained siddhi. They in turn transmitted these teachings to others 
who also became siddhas. Therefore it is said that Marpa established 
the source of the river, which is a spring, from which many siddhas 
have arisen. The reason is that the special teachings were so profound. 
25. In the Lachi snow mountains of the "West 
26. The excellent being, Laughing Vajra, 
27. Attained the state of unity in one lifetime. 
40 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
Then the lineage continues to Milarepa whose main abode was 
the snow mountain range of Lachi. The fact that a cold region was 
his main abode is an indication of his practice of subtle heat. He is 
called Shepa Dorje or "Laughing Vajra," because when Marpa 
bestowed the empowerment of Chakrasamvara on him, 
Chakrasamvara was seen actually appearing and giving the name 
"Laughing Vajra" to Milarepa. Because he had these exceptional 
teachings and put them into practice, Milarepa attained the ability 
to reach the state of union (enlightenment) in a single lifetime. 
28. In the pure land of Dhaklha Campo in the East 
29. The honorable doctor, the second Buddha, 
30. Actualized the samadhi of the tenth bodhisattva level 
Milarepa passed on these special and exceptional teachings to 
Gampopa who was like a second Buddha. By putting these exceptional 
teachings from Milarepa into practice, Gampopa was able to actualize 
the samadhi of the tenth bodhisattva level (Skt. bhumi). In the East 
in the pure land called Dhaklha Gampo, Gampopa established 
Dhaklha Gampo Monastery as his main seat and continued the 
lineage. So there were these first lineage holders: Tilopa, Naropa, 
Marpa, Milarepa, and Gampopa. 
31. In the holy places of the body, speech, and mind centers, 
32. The many siddhas of the four great and eight lesser lineages 
33. Gained the essential power of Mahamudra 
34. And couldn't help but reach Buddhahood. 
The line "in the holy places of body, speech, and mind centers" 
refers to the three main seats begun by Dusum Khyenpa (the first 
Karmapa) where the Karma Kagyu teachings flourished. The 
THE IMPORTANCE OF THE LINEAGE LAMAS 41 
monasteries referred to are Gampo (body), Karma Gon (speech), 
and Tsurphu (mind) monasteries. These are the three sources or three 
original seats of the Karma Kagyu teachings which Jamgon Kongtrul 
says are like the purified aspects of the chakras of body, speech, and 
mind, and that many siddhas arose from these centers. 
Gampopa had many disciples and in these places of body, speech, 
and mind arose the four greater and eight lesser lineages of the Kagyu 
tradition. He gave some teachings to some disciples and other 
teachings to other disciples. He had twelve main disciples each of 
whom in turn completely passed on the special instructions they 
had received. In this way, they developed an unbroken lineage of the 
four greater and the eight lesser Kagyu schools.7 
So in this way all the way down to one's root lama there have 
been unimaginable siddhas. All these various lamas of the Kagyu 
lineage are like siddhas or Buddhas because they practiced and 
mastered the Mahamudra. There was no way for them not to attain 
Buddhahood. 
35. Expert in the attracting power through bodhichitta, 
36. They couldn't help but bring benefit to beings. 
These lineage lamas were able to benefit an unimaginable number 
of beings. Each one had many, many disciples who were very special 
individuals who were naturally drawn to them. The reason that they 
had these many disciples and were able to spread their teachings so 
widely was that they had bodhichitta. They had the aspiration to 
attain enlightenment which came from their desire to benefit beings. 
If one has bodhichitta, then automatically beings are drawn to one 
because of the bodhichitta. However, it will be very noticeable if 
someone with the desire to be surrounded by an entourage tries to 
promote him or hersel( People can usually tell if something is not 
42 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
very straightforward or honest and nobody comes. But if one has a 
sincere wish to help beings, then just from the power of the 
bodhichitta, beings gather around and there is an automatic ability 
to help many beings. The text says that because the lineage lamas are 
skilled in bodhichitta, there is no way beings will not be spontaneously 
or automatically helped through this bodhichitta, and there is no 
way not to help beings. 
37. Having perfected the two accumulations, this profound 
attainment of wealth, 
38. They could not help but experience enjoyment. 
These lineage lamas also naturally acquired a great deal of wealth 
and necessities. If one thinks that there is something wrong with 
dharma practitioners acquiring wealth, then this is not quite a correct 
view. These genuine beings have no choice. These things are simply 
accumulated because they had completely accomplished the two 
accumulations of merit and wisdom. Having completed their 
accumulation of merit and wisdom, wealth and possessions 
automatically followed. 
39. Developing the knowledge that "understanding one liberates all. " 
40. They couldn't help but fulfill their great prophecies. 
Because these lamas all had great transcendent wisdom or prajna, 
all had received prophecies by the Buddha. For instance, the 
appearance of Gampopa and Jamgon Kongtrul were predicted in 
the sutras. They had prophecies due to their great insight and wisdom. 
This did not come about through many studies and working really 
hard but by developing the knowledge that "understanding one 
liberates all." If one really knows the meaning of dharmata, the nature 
THE IMPORTANCE OF THE LINEAGE LAMAS 43 
of true being, then one knows everything, so for this reason they had 
transcendental wisdom (Tib. yeshe). 
So up to this point this spiritual song has reviewed the necessity 
of faith and devotion in the root and lineage lamas. 
Questions 
Question: What is unobstructed mind? 
Rinpoche: Unobstructed means first of all unborn. If something is 
not born, there is no ceasing. then when you see that it is empty of 
essence, then there is no obstruction. If something were solid and 
corporeal it would be an obstruction. If at first there is emptiness, 
then there can be no thing to obstruct. 
Mind's very nature is empty, therefore, the appearances that arrive 
from within that emptiness are also by nature empty, they basically 
have no intrinsic reality. 
Question: What is mind? Is it opposed to objects? 
Rinpoche: To our perception it seems that mind arises based on objects. 
But really, objects arise based on mind. Without investigating it, 
mind seems to arise in response to objects. But if you really examine 
mind when it seems to arise, you see it is empty of essence. Therefore, 
it is called unborn and unceasing. Sometimes the terms 
"unobstructed," "unmoving," "primordially permanent" and 
"undemonstratable" and so forth are used. The reason is that its 
essential nature is non-existent. There is no way to say, "here it is," 
or "it is like this." 
Question: If mind is unobstructed, how does karma fit in? 
Rinpoche: As we discussed previously, there is the way it is and the 
way it is confused (or appears). Mind being permanent, unchanging, 
44 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
etc. These are statements in relation to the way it is. Karmic cause 
and effect are used in terms of the confusion. From the perspective 
of confusion, anything can arise. When anything arises, karma takes 
place. As is said, "awareness is the self and intrinsic radiance is the 
effect." There is the perception of the existence of self and outer 
objects, and based on that actions are accumulated, and based on 
that their results occur, then the essential nature is completely lost. 
The root of all that, however, is the mind and in it there is not even 
a bit of existence. This is the whole point of meditating on the nature 
of mind-it is the root of the whole thing. 
For example, on television we can watch the news from India 
or Russia or anything. But when we turn off the television it is 
basically dumb and speechless and can't show anything at all. Like 
this, anything that arises does so in basic bewilderment, but if you 
really look at the root or source, if you meditate on the mind, you 
see it is empty of anything. If you just look at the turned off 
television nothing is there. 
2 
The View zn Mahamudra 
IN THE PREVIOUS CHAPTER THE necessity of the exalted root and I i neage 
lamas, and the manner of showing faith and devotion for receiving 
the blessings was discussed. We will now discuss mainly the 
importance of enthusiastic effort, mindfulness, and awareness. 
Generally, the way to cultivate these is explained in the Song of Lodro 
Thaye as being dependent on the special qualities that have arisen 
due to the connection with the exceptional root and lineage lamas. 
So a special meditation arose in the stream of being of Jamgon 
Kongtrul, but it wasn't due to his own powers but to the blessings of 
the root and lineage lamas. It is explained by way of two examples. 
Diligence, awareness, and mindfulness are very important for 
attaining experience quickly. But if we don't have them, everything 
is not just a waste of time. For instance, if a person in Halifax 
wants to go to Gampo Abbey, but doesn't have much mindfulness 
or diligence, he or she may take one step, and that is all. That 
person won't arrive at Gampo Abbey. In contrast, if one has thought, 
"I want to meditate," eventually this thought will have a great effect. 
So even just visualizing the lama one time above one's head or doing 
one mantra will later have a very great result and is certainly not a 
waste of time. But if we want to attain Buddhahood right now, 
then we really need diligence, mindfulness and awareness. So the 
46 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
Buddha said when one takes one step with the motivation to attain 
enlightenment, it is very beneficial. But in the end it is not enough. 
41. Children of parents who have accumulated much wealth 
42. Are naturally rich due to previous karma. 
43. Offipring of the white lioness and of the great garuda 
44. Are naturally folly developed with the power of their species. 
There are two examples given here. A child of a wealthy person 
is born with all the pleasures to enjoy him or herself. The child has 
not accumulated this through his own efforts but through the efforts 
of his father and forbearers. He or she has wealth to use and yet it 
wasn't through his or her own efforts but through positive karma 
accumulated in previous lives. The second example is of lion cubs 
and the garuda babies who are both very powerful animals. They are 
powerful from the time they are born, 8 not because they have 
developed the strength but they inherited their strength as part of 
their species. 
4 5. The followers of the lineage of Kagyu siddhas 
46. Meditate naturally from the strength of blessings. 
In the same way, meditation naturally arose in the stream of 
being of Jamgon Kongtrul Rinpoche and the other lineage lamas 
regardless of whether they were diligent or not. This natural arising 
came through the power of blessings. The blessings were unbroken 
and pure starting from Tilopa right down to Jamgon Kongtrul's own 
lama Perna Nyingche Wangpo. It wasn't as if the lineage was good 
for a while and then broken later on. It was unsurpassed all the way 
through, not only in words and scholarship, but also in actual practice 
experience. Therefore, there was the power of blessings. Meditation 
THE VIEW IN MAHAMUDRA 47 
arose from the blessing of the lineage because each and every one of 
the holders of the lineage starting with Tilopa obtained complete 
mastery and was a siddha. He then passed these same instructions 
on to Naropa, who not only obtained the words but went on to 
obtain complete mastery of the meditation ability. He then passed 
them on to Marpa who also became a siddha. The lineage continued 
to Milarepa and so on to Perna Nyingche Wangpo. 
47. Boastfully counting the years of practice, 
48. Proud about dwelling in leisure, 
49. Puffed up over the exertions of sitting, 
50. Chauvinist in discriminating self above others, 
The process of passing on the lineage is different from what 
ordinary people do. Ordinary individuals might meditate diligently 
for many years and announce, "I meditated for nine years" or "I have 
been meditating for fifteen years and it looks like I must have 
experience and realization because I have been meditating for all 
these years." But Jamgon Kongtrul did not say this because no matter 
how many years one meditates, if the three aspects of effort, 
mindfulness, and awareness are not present, it does not do any good. 
Some people might develop pride about staying in retreat or 
alone in isolation, which should lead to great results in practice. But 
this pride is empty. If pride develops simply because of having stayed 
in retreat, no matter how long one meditates, if there is not 
mindfulness, awareness, or enthusiasm, there won't be any results. 
In fact, just being all alone with nothing to do and with nobody 
around is completely meaningless and nothing to be proud about. 
Arrogance and haughtiness can develop when enduring an 
ascetic existence saying, "I have endured so many hardships. I have 
persisted through many difficulties in meditation. Because I have 
48 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODROTHAYE 
gone through these many hardships and deprivations, this is practice." 
However, if one misses the point of the practice, there is nothing to 
be arrogant about. 
A feeling of superiority can develop when one distinguishes 
oneself from others and regards others with disdain, thinking, "I am 
so much better than these people. I have such and such qualities that 
I developed over these long years, so I am actually much better than 
everybody else." Once again, if diligence, mindfulness, and awareness 
are not applied, one has missed the whole point of meditation and 
this feeling of superiority is absolutely useless. 
51. Keeping track of one's ordinary discursive thoughts, 
52. Counting them to be the actual realizations on the paths and stages: 
One might believe one's ordinary thoughts are special thinking, 
"I have developed this spiritual quality" and being very hopeful about 
it. But again, without effort, mindfulness, and awareness this is 
useless. So the problem is thinking that, "Oh, I've been meditating, 
this must be a sign of good meditation." Then one keeps score: 
"There's an experience, this must be a sign of attaining the first 
bodhisattva level or sign of actual realization on the path." 
To summarize, these five aspects of thinking of how long one has 
meditated, how much one has been in retreat, how much difficulty 
one has gone through, how much better one is than everyone else, and 
then keeping track of one's qualifications, are not beneficial at all. 
53. Such are the distinctive characteristics of foolish 
meditators in this degenerate age. 
54. No siddha can be named who would be free of them 
55. But because of the fine oral instructions of the exemplary lineage 
56. The primordial wisdom of ultimate Mahamudra is seen. 
THE VIEW IN MAHAMUDRA 49 
These are degenerate times where faith and devotion don't come 
easily, and there are many mistaken kinds of meditation. These are 
the distinguishing characteristics of this age. We do not hear of 
mahasiddhas who are free of these characteristics. These kind of 
calculating thoughts of beings to be spiritually realized have nothing 
to do with true mastery or siddhi. It is no indication of spiritual 
qualities at all. Even though he lived in a degenerate age, Jamgon 
Kongtrul through the lineage received the true, profound instructions 
and practiced according to these instructions. Based on these special 
instructions of the lineage, the meaning, the result, the fruition of 
these instructions was seeing the transcendent wisdom of 
Mahamudra. Through the arising of this wisdom, the ground, path, 
and fruition Mahamudra is understood. 
57. Foundation Mahamudra is understanding the nature, the view. 
58. Path Mahamudra is experiencing it, the meditation. 
59. Fruition Mahamudra is the realization ofBuddhahood in one's mind. 
In this text Mahamudra is divided into three parts: ground or 
foundation Mahamudra, path Mahamudra, and fruition 
Mahamudra. These three parts basically constitute the rest of the 
text. Of these three, the foundation has to do with the nature of 
things as they are, the nature of truth. Jamgon Kongtrul intellectually 
understood the nature of the view of Mahamudra, ground 
Mahamudra. The path ofMahamudra is meditation and what arises 
in meditation, that is, experience. Finally, the fruition of that 
experience arising in one's being is ultimately realizing that the 
Buddha is not outside of oneself, but within one. One's mind is 
the state of Buddha. These three aspects of ground, path, and 
fruition were fully understood by Jamgon Kongtrul. 
50 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
60. I am unworthy, but my guru is excellent. 
61. Even though born in the degenerate age, I have good fortune. 
62. In spite of little perseverance, the instructions are profound. 
How is it that Jamgon Kongtrul has understood the foundation 
Mahamudra, experienced the path, and realized the fruition 
Mahamudra? It is not just from himself for he says he has no power 
to engender these kinds of qualities or great wisdom and diligence. 
However, he did have the advantage that his lama was good. Also, 
even though he lived in a degenerate age where he could not even 
meet the Buddha or bodhisattvas, Jamgon Kongtrul was personally 
very fortunate, which was the second advantage that he had. Finally, 
he says that he had very little perseverance but he was fortunate in 
having received the profound teachings. Through these advantages: 
having a great lama, having great fortune, and having the profound 
teachings, he was able to realize the Mahamudra. 
For these reasons Jamgon Kongtrul could compose this song, 
and his understanding and experience of Mahamudra make it 
worthwhile to study and practice. Next, the three aspects of ground, 
path, and fruition will be discussed in detail in the following chapters. 
3 
Ground Mahamudra 
I. GROUND MAHAMUDRA 
63. What is foundation Mahamudra? 
Mahamudra (Tib. chakgya chenpo} is Sanskrit, the word maha 
corresponding in Tibetan to chenpo which means "great." Mudra 
actually is the word gya in Tibetan, more commonly called tise, which 
means "seal" as in the seals a king stamps on his edicts. The Tibetan 
translators then added the word chak which is the honorific form for 
"hand," and is not actually in the Sanskrit word. Gya indicates the 
all-pervasive quality ofMahamudra. For instance, a king creates laws 
and edicts and may issue an edict with many minor points on it. He 
doesn't have to put his seal on every single point, but can just apply 
it once to indicate that all of these laws came from him. In the same 
way, when we meditate and recognize the true nature of mind, which 
is Mahamudra, it pervades all aspects of experience. Everything is 
possible, everything has this seal on it. So we don't have to meditate 
to clear away all our desire, then start again to eliminate aggression, 
then start again to remove ignorance, and so on. One realization, 
that of Mahamudra, removes all these different obscurations and 
develops all the good qualities. 
52 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
So gya with this meaning of pervasiveness should be understood 
as intrinsic awareness (Skt. jnana Tib. yeshe). A tise is used mainly by 
a king on his edicts, and awareness is "stamped" on the general essence 
as well as the manifestations of all phenomena. Chak was needed 
because the natural essence of intrinsic awareness is emptiness. The 
luminosity and emptiness of phenomena are inseparable. Awareness 
and space (Tib. ying) are united. So the chak (hand), represents 
emptiness, because a hand with nothing in it, by itself, is also empty. 
The emptiness or space is chak and the clarity or pervasive awareness 
is gya. Awareness realizes emptiness, emptiness is the essence of 
awareness; and the two are inseparable. 
In brief, how we are to understand chak gya chen po is that our 
mind stream or nature has awakened awareness (Skt. buddhajnana, 
Tib. sang gye yeshe). This awakened awareness is not like the "self" 
posited by other religious traditions, but its essential true nature is 
empty. This awareness, inseparable from dharmakaya, is present in 
all beings with sentience, and becomes manifest at the time of 
attaining the state of a Buddha. 
In the Buddhist tradition, the goal of practice is to attain the 
state of a Buddha. But this state is not newly attained, but one that is 
manifested or realized. The Shakyamuni Buddha demonstrated that 
we already have this quality. Therefore, in Mahamudra this is called 
the ground or foundation Mahamudra, meaning we have it already. 
But because we do not experience it that way, then we need the path 
Mahamudra. Based on the path, what one already possesses can be 
actualized, and that's called fruition Mahamudra. So these are the 
ground, path, and fruition of Mahamudra. 
The view is like this. Generally our whole experience consists of 
two kinds of grasping. All appearance occurs to us because of the 
objective grasping to object and subjective grasping of mind. Even 
though this is our experience, it is not actually the real state of 
GROUND MAHAMUDRA 53 
phenomena, but an illusion or bewilderment. Mahamudra is the 
realization of the true nature without bewilderment. From the point 
of view of Madhyamaka the true state of phenomena is emptiness. 
But everything is not just empty because there is also a clear or 
luminous aspect to it which we call awareness or jnana. That is why 
we talk about indivisibility or the union of space and awareness. 
This union of space and awareness is the view of ground Mahamudra. 
We need to intellectually understand this fact and then the actual 
experience of it is path Mahamudra. When this understanding and 
experience is complete, then one has achieved fruition Mahamudra. 
There is an example in the Uttaratantra illustrating the 
relationship of ground, path, and fruition Mahamudra. It is as if a 
person lost a large bag of gold by throwing it out with the garbage 
and this gold became buried under the refuse. Eventually it became 
completely covered with dirt and sand and may have become 
tarnished. But the gold never lost any of its value because its qualities 
are inherent within the gold. Many thousands of years pass but the 
gold still keeps all of its value. Then a very poor man comes along 
and builds a shack on this spot not knowing that there is gold under 
it. He is very poor, not having clothes or food and all the time he is 
sitting on top of this incredibly valuable treasure. But the treasure 
does him no good because he does not know about it. Then a person 
with clairvoyance comes along and sees this person who is starving 
right on top of a huge treasure of gold. All he would need to do is 
say, you don't need to be so poor, just dig a few feet under the ground 
and you will have all this gold. So the poor man digs down a little bit 
and there is all this gold. Similarly, we say we have the nature of 
Mahamudra, but we don't know it. The Buddha comes along and 
says that we are Mahamudra and all you have to do is find it. The 
ground Mahamudra is the gold right underneath our feet. The poor 
man's effort to scrape away a litde dirt to get at it is like the path 
54 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
Mahamudra. If we don't make some effort, then we can't get the 
gold. Fruition Mahamudra is like when the poor man finds the gold 
and completely casts away his poverty. 
64. It exists in two ways: the natural state and the state of confusion. 
Ground Mahamudra exists in two ways: "the natural state and 
the state of confusion." That is, the natural way we are and the 
confusion that occurs from not having recognized that. In this 
example, the way it is (the nature) is that this poor man is sitting 
right on top of a lot of gold. We have Mahamudra; we have Buddha­
nature (Skt. tathagatagarbha). However, the poor man is dwelling in 
poverty because he has no idea what he is sitting on. That is the 
confusion. Nevertheless in both cases the gold is there. 
Within Mahamudra we possess Buddha-nature, we are 
Mahamudra, which is the true nature of things or the way they are 
(Tib. ne lug). We are confused because we simply don't recognize our 
true nature. That is the confused aspect (Tib. trullug). We need to 
know why we are confused and where the confusion comes from. So 
in ground Mahamudra we need to deal with our nature (ne lug) and 
the way we are confused (trullug). 
65. It cannot be divided into samsara or nirvana, 
66. And it is devoid of the extremes of adding on or taking away. 
The next verses explain Mahamudra first as the nature of the 
way it is. First of all, Mahamudra does not fall into the category of 
being samsara or nirvana, of being good or bad. Samsara is without 
substantial reality to begin with, so nirvana or passing beyond 
suffering is also not something separate from that. Samsara and 
nirvana are not separate substantial things. 
GROUND MAHAMUDRA 55 
Furthermore, Mahamudra is completely without any elaboration 
or exaggeration, nor is it anything to be subtracted from or denigrated. 
You can't add qualities saying Mahamudra has such and such qualities. 
You also can't say Mahamudra has no qualities or characteristics and 
thus diminish it. All kinds of elaboration or embellishment, all kind 
of projections or conceptualization about Mahamudra are not 
possible. It is essentially free from all extremes of existence, 
nonexistence and so forth. 
67. Not created by a cause, not altered by conditions, 
68. Confusion does not make it worse. 
69. Realization does not improve it. 
Mahamudra also did not originate as a new phenomena and it 
did not result from any cause and it is not changed by any external 
conditions. Mahamudra has existed from the beginning of time and 
is present in all beings. The essence ofMahamudra never changes. It 
is unborn and unchangeable and immutable. In the example of the 
treasure, when the gold is in the ground, its essence is completely 
unchanged. The fact that it is covered with rubbish doesn't make it 
any worse or any better, because in essence it is gold. When the poor 
man digs it up, shines it up, and cleans away the dirt, the essence is 
still the same. It is not changed by the conditions of anyone doing 
anything with it. In this way, Mahamudra in the state ofbewilderment 
of samsara is not any worse or any different from Mahamudra when 
it is recognized through the yogi's meditation, it also is not any better 
because it is unchanging. 
In the Buddhist tradition the teachings of the Buddha are divided 
into the sutras and tantras. In the surra tradition, in the philosophy 
called Middle-way, there are two ways of thinking about emptiness 
which are called the Rangtong or "Self-emptiness" school and the 
56 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
Shentong or the "Other-emptiness" school. The Middle-way 
Rangtong school emphasizes the concept of dharmadhatu. The 
principal nature of Mahamudra is emptiness, and this is called 
dharmadhatu or the realm of reality. The Middle-way Shentong 
school, on the other hand, focuses on the aspect of awareness (Skt. 
jnana) and emphasizes the concept of tathagatagarbha or literally, 
"the essence of the tathagatas" (Buddhas), often called Buddha-nature 
or Buddha essence. In meaning however, these two concepts are 
essentially the same. In the tantras, based on actual meditation practice 
there is the emphasis on introduction or transmission which reveals 
the essence or nature of the mind, which we call Mahamudra. This 
mind's essence is basically the same as the Middle-way concepts of 
the sutra tradition. That is why Rangjung Dorje said that "Middle­
way" and "Mahamudra," and "Dzogchen" all apply to the same thing. 
70. Confusion is not experienced, nor is it liberation. 
71. Since its essence cannot be established in any way, 
72. Its expression is unimpeded and can appear in any way. 
In Mahamudra, essentially there is no experience of bewilderment 
or confusion or liberation. Just as the gold underneath the earth has 
the same essence whether covered by earth or not, whether taken 
out or cleaned, it still retains the same essence, meaning it is the 
same material. This essence, furthermore, has no substantial reality. 
Since in essence it is identical with dharmadhatu, it's essentially, by 
nature, empty. 
Although the essence ofMahamudra is non-existent, at the same 
time, its manifestation is completely unobstructed. For instance, we 
can say our mind is empty because when we look for it, it is nowhere 
to be found. However, when we don't look, it manifests as anything. 
It is completely unobstructed in its nature. In the same way, 
GROUND MAHAMUDRA 57 
Mahamudra does not actually exist as an object, it is dharmadhatu, 
but from the luminosity aspect it is unobstructed and can manifest 
in any way whatsoever. It can manifest as awareness (Tib. yeshe) on 
the level of Buddha or manifest as consciousness (Tib. namshe) on 
the level of ordinary beings. 9 It arises unimpeded as all positive or 
negative manifestations. 
73. Encompassing all ofsamsara and nirvana, it is like space. 
Mahamudra pervades everywhere, samsara as well as nirvana. 
When wandering in samsara, it is completely there in essence. 
Similarly, when going beyond suffering to a state of nirvana, it also 
is completely pervasive like the sky. Just as the sky is everywhere we 
go, so Mahamudra is completely all-pervasive. 
74. Confusion or liberation, it is the basis of all, 
75. Self-illuminating, knowing, capable of manifestation. 
Ground or foundation Mahamudra is divided into two parts: 
the way things are and the way things are confused. The way things 
are concerns the essential quality of emptiness, the nature of 
luminosity (Tib. salwa) and the unimaginable qualities of awakening 
and how these qualities manifest. Now we will discuss the methods 
for realization of this true nature. 
Mahamudra is also the foundation of everything, the foundation 
of all confusion and bewilderment, as well as the foundation of 
liberation. Mahamudra is the foundation of confusion in samsara 
because in samsara one's confusion is taking place in the space of 
Mahamudra. Similarly, one's liberation in nirvana is taking place in 
the space ofMahamudra. So Mahamudra is the ground of everything. 
Since it is the ground, apprehension of its own clarity can occur. 
58 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
Due to Mahamudra having clarity (or luminosity), it is also possible 
for mind to arise in that space. 
One could meditate directly on Mahamudra right from the 
beginning with diligence and attain Buddhahood. But it has been 
discovered that most of us need a tremendous amount of effort to do 
that and lose enthusiasm just doing the same thing all the time. 
Therefore, various skillful methods were devised to help us along in 
our Mahamudra practice. It is like having a big meal of plain rice 
with nothing on it. We can eat it once, but we can't keep eating it. 
We need to put a little salt and some soy sauce; then we are able to 
eat more and keep on eating rice. If we eat just plain rice, we lose our 
appetite when faced with a huge bowl of rice. So the yidam practices 
were developed as a skillful means to develop the mental faculties to 
focus the mind, to clarify the mind and to develop the sharpness of 
mind. These methods help us maintain our diligence in the practice 
of Mahamudra. These yidam practices are divided into the creation 
stage (Skt. uppatti-krama) and the completion stage (Skt. sampanna­
krama). In the creation stage, the mind becomes very clear, very 
focused and free from distraction. The completion stage of yidam 
practice is no different from Mahamudra. 
From the point of view of philosophy, there are two major schools 
of thought concerned here: the Mind-only (Skt. Chittamatra) school 
and the Middle-way (Skt. Madhyamaka) school. The Mind-only view 
is that all external appearances have no real existence but are just 
mind. The Middle-way school holds that the mind also has no real 
existence and is essentially empty. For those of us who do Mahamudra 
practice we must first understand that all external appearances or 
phenomena are actually mind and then realize the mind is empty to 
be able to establish the true view of Mahamudra. 
How is it that all appearances are mind? First of all, through 
examination of solid external appearances we find that they do not 
GROUND MAHAMUDRA 59 
really exist. We simply use labels for external appearances that are 
made by the mind. For instance, we have the word "hand" which we 
apply to a hand. But if we examine this hand closely we find that the 
"hand" is actually made up offour fingers and the thumb and various 
joints and skin and so on. The thing we call a "hand" is actually 
made up of other parts and there isn't a single thing we can say is a 
hand. It is just a label for this collection of things that appear together. 
Even examining further, a thumb has joints and a knuckle and a 
fingernail and these different parts are conveniently labeled a "thumb," 
even though a thumb is not a single thing by itself. 
So in this way we see that actual external objects have no real 
intrinsic existence. But how is this possible? In essence they do not 
exist, but they appear to the mind. What is the reasoning here? In 
the language of the dharma, we say, "being clarity, it is awareness." 
For example, I can say this table exists because it appears clearly in 
my mind. Other than that, I can give no other reason. Because I can 
see it with "my" eyes, I can understand it with "my" mind and I can 
touch it with "my" hand, therefore there seems to be a table there. If 
I ask someone else if it exists, they will say it does and when I ask 
why they will say, "I see it with 'my' eyes and I can touch it with 'my 
hand."' So the existence of an object depends only on the relationship 
to our perception and there is no other reason to say it exists. Using 
careful reasoning we can come to the conclusion that all phenomena 
appear to our mind and exist relative to our mind and this is a sign 
that appearance is mind. 
This is why we can say all appearances are mind. In general, 
there are two kinds of phenomena: external appearances and internal 
mental events. We have seen how external phenomena are mind. 
Subjectively, the mental experiences such as desire, confusion, hatred, 
compassion, love, happiness, and sadness are also obviously mind. 
So both external appearances and internal experiences are mind. 
60 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
So by examination we first gain the understanding that all 
appearances are mind. Knowing this we sit down and practice 
meditation and from this meditation we gain a conviction that this 
is so, and we can meditate with this direct feeling that all phenomena 
are mind. The first stage is the "introduction" of all appearance as 
mind and the second is the causal experience in meditation. 
What is the root of saying, ''All phenomena are mind?" The text 
says, "with the foundation consciousness." In more detail, in the 
Mind-only Buddhist school the mind has eight aggregates of 
consciousness. This contrasts with non-Buddhist Indian philosophies 
where it is believed that these consciousnesses are a single 
consciousness called the "self" or atman. This non-Buddhist theory 
says that it seems mind has more than one consciousness but this 
can be explained by the example of a house with six windows and a 
single monkey inside; the monkey races around sometimes looking 
out the north window and sometimes looking out the south window 
and so forth. From the outside of the house it looks like there are 
many monkeys (consciousnesses) because one always sees a monkey's 
face in the six windows. But really, this is just one monkey. The 
non-Buddhist philosophies therefore conclude there is just one 
"self" which sometimes is perceived through the eyes, sometimes 
through the ears, sometimes the tongue and so on like the monkey 
running around. 
From the Buddhist point of view, however, there are actually 
many consciousnesses. These are usually called the set of six or eight 
consciousnesses 10 which are called aggregates because there are many 
consciousnesses within each of these. Each consciousness has its own 
function; for example, the eye consciousness perceives visual form, 
and it doesn't hear sounds or smell smells and so on. The ear 
consciousness hears sounds but doesn't perceive visual forms, and so 
forth. Each of the six consciousnesses has a particular function and a 
GROUND MAHAMUDRA 61 
particular organ it is associated with. Thus the six groups of 
consciousnesses that perceive externally are associated separately with 
the eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body, and mind. 
In addition to the six consciousnesses there is also the seventh 
consciousness called the afflictive or klesha consciousness. This 
seventh consciousness is extremely subtle. It maintains the sense of 
"I" or the obscured notion of self. It does not have much clarity. We 
can have an occasional strong clinging to the idea of self such as 
when we have accomplished something great or have done something 
terrible, this strong feeling of "I" is the result of the sixth mental 
consciousness, not the subtle continuous feeling of "I exist." The 
ever-present, underlying subtle sense of self or ego is the afflictive or 
seventh consciousness. The ground upon which these consciousnesses 
arise, the continuity of our mind which is present whether or not 
other consciousnesses are functioning is the eighth consciousness 
called the "alaya consciousness," or "all-ground consciousness." It is 
that bare continuum of clarity that is never interrupted and is the 
"foundation of all consciousnesses" mentioned in the root verse. 11 
How do these eight consciousnesses come about? Previously, we 
described two aspects of mind as being empty and being luminous 
clarity. When the emptiness aspect is strong the alaya consciousness 
is just empty. When the luminosity aspect becomes stronger, 
appearances arise in it. Yet if one doesn't examine the nature of that 
luminosity of the foundation consciousness, then without awareness 
of the essential emptiness of this consciousness, one errs on the side 
ofluminosity by becoming attached to all the appearances, then the 
eighth consciousness becomes the "foundation of all confusion." 12 
76. With the foundation consciousness 
77. Being neutral, it has a cognizing aspect. 
62 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
Next is says that the eighth foundation consciousness is neutral, 
but has a "cognizing" or luminous clarity.13 Although the nature of 
this foundation consciousness gives rise to ignorance, it is neither 
virtuous nor non-virtuous and is therefore called a neutral state. 
Virtuous or non-virtuous thoughts may arise to it, but the eighth 
consciousness itself is neutral. Although the eighth consciousness 
can give rise to ignorance, the essence of that ignorance is awareness 
due to its cognizing aspect or its luminosity, in the sense that anything 
can arise in the eighth consciousness. Since anything can arise in it, 
the cognizing aspect is also the cause of the ignorance or confusion. 14 
For instance, if we have a television that produces pictures which are 
so vivid and so clear, we begin to think the things we see on it are 
really there. A person really appears to be there because it is so clear 
and perfect and this cognizing aspect itselflends itself to confusion. 
78. Empty in essence, its nature is luminous. 
79. [Emptiness and luminosity] are inseparable, the heart essence 
is awareness. 
80. Unidentifiable as anything, it [resembles} space. 
Although there is this aspect of ignorance, the foundation 
consciousness is "empty in essence" and "its nature is luminous." 15 
In fact the emptiness and clarity are inseparable, but because of the 
power of the clarity aspect, the emptiness aspect of phenomena is 
not recognized. So the heart essence of awareness is somewhat 
confused. Although there is this confusion, essentially the foundation 
consciousness is not some physical, solid thing, but rather "it 
resembles space." The statement "the heart essence is awareness" means 
that the strong aspect of luminosity has the potential of awareness. 
There is both emptiness and luminosity, but the luminosity is more 
manifest and this is the heart essence of awareness (Tib. rigpai snying 
GROUND MAHAMUDRA 63 
po can). This is what is meant by "appearance is mind." Much arises 
in the foundation consciousness. When the appearances arise there, 
it is like our dreams. When we sleep, we can dream of mountains, 
oceans, horses, and elephants. Actually, they don't really appear, but 
the thought arises. When thoughts become more and more clear, 
they appear as things. In that way appearances arise in the mind. So 
we need to know that appearances are mind's own appearances. 
First we must understand that all appearances are mind by simply 
contemplating it. Then we must experience directly that appearances 
are mind through meditation by turning inward. Most people never 
think oflooking inward because their whole mind and consciousness 
is directed towards outward phenomena. Then through the lama's 
instructions we learn to look inward and to investigate awareness 
and consciousness. On top of that we need to know that mind is 
empty through recognizing its nature. 
81. It is immaculately clear, crystal jewel. 
So first we must understand that appearances are mind. Then 
we must realize that mind is empty. If one looks at the essence of 
mind, we examine or look at the foundation consciousness, the mental 
consciousness, and the sensory consciousnesses. Wherever we look, 
we find that mind has no flaws or stains. It's like the clarity of an 
immaculate jewel or a crystal. If we look into a crystal we think we 
see something in it, but really there is nothing there, just clarity, just 
a perfect clear crystal. In this way when we look at the mind there is 
nothing to see, just sheer clarity. This is what is meant by "empty" or 
"empty in essence." 
82. It is self-knowing, self-illuminating, like the brilliance of a 
butter lamp 
64 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
Mind is like a clear crystal and yet it is said to be "self-knowing, 
and self-illuminating" (Tib. rang rig rang sal). When one looks at 
mind, one can't find anything there. But mind is not like a total void 
or interruption of mental continuity, rather, mind is continual, it is 
always present. That uninterrupted presence is called luminosity. 
Similarly, if we examine our eye consciousnesses, we can't find 
anything whatsoever to that consciousness and yet before us are all 
kinds of continually appearing vivid images. If we examine the ear 
consciousness, we can't find it anywhere, but the sounds are still 
heard perfectly clearly. In the same way, when we examine the mental 
consciousness, we can't point to something and say, "Oh, this is mental 
consciousness." But mental consciousness is there continuously 
apprehending things and has a quality of continuous awareness and 
cognition. There is the "self-aware, self-luminous" quality of mind 
and this allows us to know our own luminous nature. It is like the 
light from a butter lamp. The natural radiance from a butter lamp is 
the aspect of clarity or luminosity. 
83. Inexpressible, it is (like) the experience of a mute. 
Whether we say, "the nature of mind has no intrinsic existence," 
that is, it is empty or we say, "the mind's continuity is uninterrupted," 
these are analogies for describing mind. We cannot say, "It is like 
this." It is ineffable, impossible to express in words just like the 
experience of a mute person who eats sugar for the first time and 
thinks it's really delicious but when asked what it is like, the mute 
person can only sit there in silence. So expressing the mind's nature 
is like the experience of a mute. 
84. Unveiled, it is splendid transcendent wisdom. 
GROUND MAHAMUDRA 65 
According to the general view, all phenomena are emptiness. This 
view is usually arrived at by studying logical arguments. Through 
logic one examines the mind and sees that it has no identifiable 
essence. Then one concludes from this analysis that it is emptiness. 
However, according to the secret mantra tradition (the Vajrayana), 
this view is not reached through logic, but rather through direct 
examination of the mind. By looking directly at mind, the emptiness 
of it is seen and then is understood. When emptiness is understood, 
one then realizes that "appearances are mind and mind is empty." 
One understands that mind is intrinsically non-existent. But this 
intrinsic non-existence is not simply empty. If one says, "it is not 
existent," it is still there. If one says, "it is existent," there is no 
thing there. 
The line "Unveiled, it is splendid transcendent wisdom," means 
that this wisdom cannot be obscured by anything. "Transcendent 
wisdom" means that there is no person or thing or event that can 
block it. This luminosity of one's mind couldn't be blocked even if 
one tried. It is always naturally present without interruption. But 
the essence of this wisdom being unveiled does not mean it is really 
some actual thing. Its essence is empty, transparent, splendid, and 
luminous. It is called "clear light" (Tib. osal), dharmakaya or 
sugatagarbha. Sugatagarbha is the potential or seed of the Buddha, 
sometimes called Buddha-nature. 
85. Clear light, dharmakaya, sugatagarbha, 
86. It is pure from the beginning and spontaneous. 
87. Nobody can prove it by the use of examples, 
88. No words can express it. 
89. The dharmadhatu cannot be examined by logic. 
66 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
This sugatagarbha is present and is "primordially pure" which 
is to say that it is flawless and unaffected by any negativity. At the 
same time, it is always spontaneously present, not created anew 
but naturally present. In the Middle-way Shentong view it is 
described as being by nature "completely pure" and "free from 
incidental blemish." So this kind of nature is described as 
"spontaneously present." 
Many wise people have tried to give many examples about this 
state, but in fact these examples are completely inadequate. Nothing 
can point it out. For instance, we can use the analogy of a lump of 
gold buried beneath the ground for explaining the essence of 
sugatagarbha, but sugatagarbha is not really a big lump. One will 
never be capable of describing it. 
There are nine examples in the Uttaratantra16 that try to describe 
this Buddha-nature by trying first with one example, then with a 
second, and then a third and so on. However, if"no words can express 
it" whatever word one uses will not be right. One cannot say it is this 
or it isn't this. One cannot use any words. The line "cannot be 
examined by logic" means that aside from the direct experience in 
meditation, it cannot be identified through mental concepts. It is 
the dharmadhatu, the realm of reality. 
90. This is laid down right at the beginning 
91. One should dissipate all doubts. 
In general, as explained above, from the aspect of luminosity it 
is called sugatagarbha. Words cannot explain it and examples cannot 
illustrate it; from this aspect of its intrinsic emptiness it is called 
"dharmadhatu."This is wisdom and realm (Skt. dhatu). Dharmadhatu 
is unimaginable, essentially emptiness. This needs to be " ... laid down 
right at the beginning." This is extremely important for meditation. 
GROUND MAHAMUDRA 67 
All doubts or conceptual embellishments must subsequently be 
dissipated and one should not indulge in thoughts of "mind is this, 
it is not this." Let go of all such embellishments, recall experiencing 
mind. If one really practices meditation it will be extremely clear 
and all doubts are vanquished. 
92. Maintaining meditation sustained by the view 
93. Is like a garuda soaring to the sky. 
94. Devoid of any fear or doubt 
According to the sutra tradition, the establishment of the view 
depends on logical reasoning. In the mantra tradition, the view is 
based on the experience of meditation. Both of these traditions 
establish the view which is understood from looking at the clarity or 
luminous aspect of mind. In the sutra tradition, after contemplating 
it one thinks, "Oh, it seems to be like this" and establishes the view 
that way. In the mantra tradition, meditation leads one to the 
experience of the way it is and thus establishes the view that way. 
One needs a view or outlook on where one is going. If one has a 
good view, then one can maintain meditation to its end. If one has a 
good view and maintains the meditative experience, it is likened to 
the garuda soaring in space. The garuda glides beautifully and 
gracefully throughout the sky. If one doesn't have the habit of this 
experience, then one is always wondering whether one's meditation 
is correct, if it is good or bad, and so forth. Free of such thoughts, 
there is no anxiety, doubt, or fear. It is not like when we fly in an 
airplane and are afraid that it might crash! 
95. Meditation without the view 
96. Resembles a blind person entering a plain 
97. There is no way to determine the correct path 
68 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
Having "meditation without the view" means that if one doesn't 
develop the view and tries to meditate it won't work very well. It is 
like a blind man wandering on a huge plain who doesn't know 
whether he is on the right path or not and can't even decide which 
way to go. Without a view, meditation practice will not go well. 
One will not have a frame of reference to know where one is and 
where one is going. 
98. If we have the view but cannot meditate 
99. It is like a wealthy person consumed with avarice: 
100. It does not yield results for himself and others 
101. Practicing the union of both is the authentic view. 
Having realized the view, unless one then meditates, the view is 
useless. It is like the rich man who is stingy so when he really needs 
money, he doesn't use it. Without meditation, there won't be any 
benefit, just like the money of a rich stingy man doesn't benefit 
anyone. Therefore, we should fully realize the view and meditate 
well with this view. The experience of this union of view and 
meditation is the way of great beings, and we can really achieve the 
path, and, like them, through this we can achieve the path. 
102. This neutral state has an ignorant aspect, 
103. Which for five reasons, one does not recognize one's own face. 
So how does that basic confusion arise? As described before, the 
foundation consciousness is neutral but has an ignorant aspect to it. 
When we don't fully realize the nature of Mahamudra, the root of 
confusion is present in the eighth foundation consciousness. The 
root of this confusion is the five causes which obscure our true nature; 
five kinds of ego clinging which cause us to remain in samsara are: 
GROUND MAHAMUDRA 69 
(1) clinging to self, (2) being proud of our self, (3) being attached to 
self, (4) having an incorrect understanding about self, and (5) our 
mind being too luminous. With these five different causes, we develop 
clinging to the notion of self and experience excessive clarity and so 
on. Because we don't understand our own true essence of mind, we 
don't recognize our "own face." We loose the ability to recognize the 
intrinsic emptiness of mind which is the true nature of mind. 
I 04. The ocean of co-emergent ignorance, 
I 05. Is set in motion by waves of confused ego-clinging 
When we lack this basic understanding of the true nature of 
mind, we develop a basic ignorance which is co-emergent with the 
eighth foundation consciousness. 17 This co-emergent ignorance is 
like waves occurring on the surface of an ocean. 18 Clinging to a self 
is like the waves on the ocean or the seventh afflictive consciousness 
that arises from the eighth foundation consciousness. The foundation 
consciousness from which the afflictive consciousness arises is not 
without confusion or ignorance. But this confusion caused by clinging 
to a self is not inherently virtuous or non-virtuous because both 
virtuous seeds (coming from virtuous actions) and non-virtuous seeds 
(coming from negative actions) can arise in it. The foundation 
consciousness is therefore classified as neutral. Because the seventh 
afflictive consciousness arises from the alaya consciousness, it also is 
neutral even though it is called the "afflictive" consciousness. The 
seventh consciousness contains the afflictive emotions so it is called 
"afflictive," but in essence it is neither virtuous or non-virtuous. 19 In 
general "neutral" refers to both neutral obscurations and neutral non­
obscurations. The foundation consciousness is non-obscured neutral 
and the afflictive consciousness is obscured neutral. 
70 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
The eighth foundation consciousness is somewhat obscured 
because all confused appearances of samsara arise in it. But these 
confused appearances are not recognized as such. The process works 
this way: First there's the mere appearance in consciousness and then 
the clarity of the appearance increases and the waves of self-clinging 
swell. The afflictive consciousness causes more and more clarity or 
luminosity. In the foundation consciousness there is only the mere 
arising of appearance without a great deal of clinging. The foundation 
consciousness is therefore known as "mere arising" (Tib. shar tsham). 
This mere arising is then not recognized as the beginning of the 
process of confusion. 
106. Awareness becomes the "!"and its own luminosity becomes 
the objects. 
107. The imprints of subject and object become solid. 
108. So that karma is accumulated and brought to fruition 
109. The water wheel of samsara turns continuously. 
Next, describes the process of how appearances arise and lead to 
confusion rather than perceiving the true nature of reality. It begins 
when the eighth consciousness receives bewildered 20 thoughts of 
clinging to a self from the seventh afflictive consciousness. This causes 
the seventh consciousness to become clearer or more luminous 
causing the belief in a solid self to increase and for external phenomena 
to appear outside oneself as solid and real. This begins the duality of 
self and other. 
Then based on this subject-object duality, karma is accumulated. 
Karma is accumulated because we begin to judge outside appearances 
as "good" and "bad" and begin accepting some appearances and 
rejecting others. This pushing away from what we think of as "bad" 
and being attracted and attached to what we think of as "good" 
GROUND MAHAMUDRA 71 
gradually leads to the disturbing emotions (or kleshas) of attachment 
aversion and ignorance. Then our actions based on these disturbing 
emotions causes us to experience their results (or karma). This causes 
cyclic existence to revolve just like a water wheel revolves. 
110. While [samsara] is turning, its essence remains immaculate. 
111. At the very instance of appearing, it [appearances] is devoid 
of true reality. 
As explained previously, there is the alaya or foundation 
consciousness in which the afflicted consciousness causes confusion. 
In addition to the seventh afflicted consciousness, the six sense 
consciousnesses are also confused. Karma is then accumulated and 
the wheel of cyclic existence {samsara) turns. Although samsara 
appears to cycle in this way, the essence of the mind's actual nature is 
without blemish and its essence is absolutely pure. Thus the true 
nature is not covered by any disturbing emotions or faults. Since it is 
essentially stainless, the very arising of appearances are relative reality 
and empty of ultimate reality,21 empty of any truth. 
In general, in the Middle-way tradition, it is said that the essence 
of all appearing objects is empty. It is essentially empty, but this 
doesn't mean that these actual objects aren't there. These objects are 
empty only of their own nature. Appearances do continuously appear 
to mind, but they are empty of intrinsic nature. Therefore, "while 
appearing they are empty, while empty they appear." Appearances 
and emptiness are not contradictory. 
112. just appearance, they are the brilliance of the three kayas. 
The basic nature of phenomena is essentially empty. This 
emptiness of essence is dharmakaya. Then the radiance is 
72 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
unobstructed. This means that in the essential emptiness of this 
unborn nature there is nothing inhibiting or obstructing and it is 
therefore unobstructed. This unobstructed aspect or luminosity is 
the sambhogakaya. The dynamic energy (Tib. tsal) that arises from 
this in various ways or emanations is the nirmanakaya. 22 
113. The nature of their arising is unborn. 
114. The unborn cannot be obstructed. 
115. Between these two, there is no abiding. 
First of all, appearances are essentially empty but even mere 
appearances are the manifestation of the three kayas. Furthermore, 
appearances have three characteristics, which are: unborn, unceasing, 
and not abiding. Being unborn, there is no beginning and hence 
no end, and in between these there is nowhere to abide. In the past 
they are unborn, in the future unceasing, and in the present not 
abiding so they are completely free of the three times of past, present, 
and future. 
Unobstructed just means that if their essence is empty, then there 
is nothing to obstruct it. If it were a solid object, then it could be 
blocked or obstructed. But being empty it is unobstructed. 
Unobstructed mind does not have to do with whether outside objects 
exist or not, but the fact that the mind is empty by nature means 
that it can arise or manifest as anything. It is not obstructed by its 
own nature, whatsoever. It is empty. It may seem from our experience 
that our mind (or thinking) is created by perception of external objects 
and therefore we experience mind by perceiving an object. But actually 
it is the other way around: when we have direct experience of mind, 
we find out that the experience of objects is due to the mind. First, 
the objects are recognized as mind and then with closer examination 
we discover that mind is essentially empty, which is why it is 
GROUND MAHAMUDRA 73 
unobstructed, unborn, endless, and does not dwell anywhere. This 
is because there is nothing there to be born, to abide, and to die. 
When saying mind is unobstructed we are talking about the 
essence of mind, not that the mind is a permanent thing. We are 
talking about the essential emptiness of mind. But from the emptiness 
any amount of prajna or jnana can arise. 
Two aspects to mind are emptiness and unobstructedness. The 
emptiness is like it is-its nature, but through ignorance we conceive 
of objects and phenomena outside ourselves. With this confusion of 
I and other, karma eventually begins to accumulate. The outside 
objects don't really exist, but we believe they exist and karma develops 
from this false belief. But actually it is the essence of mind which is 
the root or foundation of the whole thing. It is like the foundation 
from which all karma comes. 23 That is why it is so important to 
meditate on mind, because that is the very root of the process of 
creating karma. 
It is just like the example of television, you can see what is 
happening in India or Russia or America. This creates all these endless 
manifestations, but if we suddenly turn the television off, it appears 
to be all gone. In the same way, we have to recognize what is projecting 
all these manifestations. We need to get right to the root, which is 
the mind, and cut this off. Cutting off at the root is like unplugging 
the television. 
116. From this mind itself, so hard to describe, 
1 17. The various displays of samsara and nirvana arise. 
The essential quality of mind is emptiness and this is difficult or 
impossible to express. It is hard to say specifically that it is this or 
that. Yet it is the basis for the manifestation of all samsara and all 
nirvana. From the basic nature of mind, in cyclic existence, the various 
74 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
appearances arise and when there is transcendence of the cycle of 
samsara, then the various qualities of nirvana arise. So the mind is 
the source of various appearances. 
118. Seeing them as self-liberating is the highest view. 
119. If it is recognized, all is such ness. 
120. If there is nothing to refute or establish, it is the innate state. 
121. When conceptual mind is transcended, there is the ultimate. 
Foundation Mahamudra is concerned with the way of realizing 
the view of this basic nature. Path Mahamudra is concerned with 
how one goes about realizing that the mind is self-liberated and how 
all these various appearances of samsara and nirvana arise. On the 
relative level these appearances bind us, but on the absolute level 
they do not bind us.24 The mind is self-liberating means it has always 
been like it is. It is like pounding a heap of ashes-no matter how 
hard you pound, you still only get ashes. Self-liberation then is the 
ultimate view when conventional mind is transcended. 
Understanding mind as self-liberating is the understanding of 
everything. If this is recognized as the nature of all things then outer 
phenomena and inner mind are realized as this very suchness. Then 
there is no longer anything to accept or reject. This is the innate 
nature of mind which is completely beyond any intellectual process, 
completely beyond mind, it is the absolute natural state. If in one­
pointed concentration or samadhi one realizes this basic nature, then 
it is said one has realized the ultimate nature of reality. This completes 
the discussion of ground Mahamudra. 
4 
Path Mahamudra 
II. PATH MAHAMUDRA 
0 F THE THREE MAJOR SECfiONS in The Song of Lodro Thaye­
ground Mahamudra, path Mahamudra, and fruition 
Mahamudra-we are in path Mahamudra, which has three parts: 
the meaning of meditation, the actual practice; the various obstacles 
and errors that can occur in the practice of Mahamudra and; the 
progress through the actual stages. 
122. Path Mahamudra refers to 
123. The Mahamudra of mind itself and the Mahamudra of 
apparent existence. 
124. Spontaneous mind is the dharmakaya. 
125. Spontaneous appearances are the light of the dharmakaya. 
The section on path Mahamudra begins with a discussion of 
two aspects of the path of Mahamudra. The first aspect is the mind 
itself and the second is all appearances. In the exceptional teachings 
of the Kagyu tradition, the first aspect is called "the Mahamudra of 
co-emergent mind itself" and the second aspect is called the 
"Mahamudra of co-emergent appearance." The first is looking 
inwardly at the grasping mind and placing it in a state of meditation, 
76 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
which leads to spontaneous mind itself. Secondly, directing one's 
attention outwardly to objective appearances and meditating on 
phenomena leads to the realization of spontaneous or co-emergent 
appearances. But these two are not essentially any different because 
basically this co-emergent mind itself is dharmakaya and the co­
emergent appearances are like the radiance or the result of 
dharmakaya. So there is really no difference between these two. 
The Tibetan word /hen chig (together or co-emergent, also 
translated as spontaneous) in Mahamudra terms means that this basic 
nature and the essential essence of one's own mind arises together. 
The first syllable /hen simply means basically "two things, not one 
thing." The second syllable chig means "one" or "single." So /hen chig 
means "two together as one," neither two or just one. Co-emergence 
is not two things because they are essentially the same and it is not a 
single thing because there are two aspects to it. In terms of the mind, 
one can say "mind" and "its basic nature" are not two separate things, 
but they are also not a single thing. In the same way, "appearances" 
and the "essence of appearances" are not two separate things and not 
one thing. 
126. When the blessings of the glorious lamas 
127. And one's own karmic dispositions come together 
128. One sees one's own face as if meeting an old acquaintance. 
We need to recognize our own nature in this way. How do we 
recognize it? There are two conditions that are necessary: first, the 
blessing of the glorious lamas. Depending on one's devotion and 
faith in the lamas, one can receive their blessings. Second, one can 
have good fortune; karmic readiness by having previously entered 
the door of dharma, met lamas, listened to dharma, practiced 
diligently, and being interested in samadhi. This is the good fortune 
PATH MAHAMUDRA 77 
of being receptive. So if these two conditions exist, Mahamudra is 
revealed and one recognizes it in the way one recognizes an old 
acquaintance. That is, like seeing someone you've met before and 
recalling, "Oh yes, I know you!" Like this example, the basic nature 
of the mind is recognized. 
129. Endless explanation is useless, 
130. The beginner needs a starting point. 
131. Don't welcome or dwell on thoughts of past and future. 
There is no point in looking for much explanation of 
Mahamudra. In short, the practice arises out of confidence, faith, 
and diligence and other than that there is really no point in endless 
explanation. Therefore, it is through meditation that recognition of 
the true nature takes place. What the beginner needs are methods to 
put into practice. For instance, one needs to practice the four common 
preliminary practices (four thoughts that turn the mind), the 
uncommon preliminary practices (Tib. Ngondro), and the practice 
of tranquility meditation (Skt. Shamatha). The beginner needs various 
kinds of techniques. First the mind must be brought to rest based on 
various techniques in the samadhi of tranquility meditation. 
In Shamatha practice, but not exclusively in Shamatha practice, 
it is taught "Don't embrace thoughts of the past." This means not to 
dwell on all the things one has done. Those thoughts should be 
temporarily set aside. Also set aside what one has just recently done. 
Similarly, don't think about what one is going to do the next day, 
making plans, and so forth. One also shouldn't dwell on the present 
by thinking about what one is doing right now, such as thinking that 
one is sitting and meditating. So this is giving up thoughts of past 
and future in one's meditation. 
78 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
132. In each moment, there is the mind of nowness. 
So how should we meditate? If we consider the past and the 
future, then discursive thinking takes over. We begin to think, "this 
happened to me" or ''I'm going to do this" and soon we are lost in 
many discursive thoughts. So don't think about the past or the future. 
Then we have awareness of the present (Tib. dantar gyi shepa). This 
awareness of the present is the momentary awareness of this very 
present instant. If one looks at this instant right now, then discursive 
thought will naturally not arise. Sometimes we call this awareness 
"fresh" (Tib. soma), which basically means "new" and this refers to 
the moment when discursive thoughts haven't yet arrived and there 
is just the freshness of the present awareness. So it is called "the instant 
of awareness of the present." An instant is of very, very brief duration 
and we should remain in the essence of this infinitely brief instant of 
present awareness. 
133. In the continual, innate state 
134. There is not the slightest thing for mind to meditate on, 
135. Or for getting lost for a moment in the confusion of wandering 
thought. 
The awareness of the present should be completely unfabricated. 
There is nothing to create, just rest in the fundamental nature in 
whatever is the essence of what is, rather than thinking, "I will 
meditate," "I will realize emptiness," "I will contemplate clearly," or 
"I will do it like this." We must rest in the mind's own basic nature, 
the natural fundamental state which is uncontrived. Then as the text 
says, "there is not the slightest thing for mind to meditate on" which 
means there is actually no meditation. 
PATH MAHAMUDRA 79 
Although there is nothing to meditate on, this is not distraction. 
If in this state of awareness we are distracted or waver, then we go 
astray. The text says not to get "lost for a moment in the confusion 
of wandering thought." Through steady mindful awareness we simply 
abide in the natural fundamental state of the present moment, without 
falling into distraction. Not only that, but do not fall off even for an 
instant, because even in that instant of distraction the basic nature 
of mind is lost. 
Now ordinary mind25 (Tib. thamal gyi shepa) and freshness (Tib. 
soma) are a way of seeing the essence of mind in its uncontrived 
state. Seeing that essence, if you don't rely on mindfulness and 
awareness, it will instantly disintegrate. Once it is lost, you are just 
an ordinary person. Therefore, you must always guard mindfulness 
and awareness. Always rest in the freshness of the present moment 
without contrivance or wavering-always maintain that. 
"Uncontrived" means that the mind itself is not following after 
thoughts, that is, its nature or essence is uncontrived. Within this 
uncontrived state, one abides always. Usually mind is producing a 
lot of thoughts and this is what we mean by contrived. We remember 
things and we fabricate or make up many things. Being uncontrived 
means cultivating just the essential nature of mind. 
In some commentaries, it says that mindfulness and awareness 
are compared to a spy-someone who watches carefully without 
drawing any attention to themselves, so they won't get caught. 
136. [For the mind to be} Without distraction, without meditation 
or fabrication is essential, 
137. Fresh, relaxed and naturally clear. 
There are six essential points in resting or placing the mind: (1) 
without distraction, (2) without meditation, (3) non-fabricated, (4) 
80 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
to have a fresh mind, (5) to have a relaxed mind, and (6) for the 
mind to be naturally dear. 
These six essential points can be condensed into three important 
points. The meditation instructions are to be undistracted and rest 
in freshness of mind. If one's mind wanders off. then one's state feels 
old and stale. Therefore, being without distraction, stay in the 
awareness of "nowness," and being in the present instant without 
wandering off is dwelling in freshness. Thus, ( 1) "without distraction" 
and (4) "freshness" are related and summarized in the first point. 
Secondly, when resting in this fresh, present state there is not the 
slightest thing for mind to meditate on. This is non-meditation. This 
means that, other than resting in the basic nature of awareness itself, 
there is no particular object at all on which to meditate or anything 
to do. So we just relax as we are without any contrivance. So (2) 
"without meditation" can be joined to (5) "relaxation" as the second 
point. The third is non-fabrication, nothing to make, so there is 
natural clarity. This meditation is extremely dear and pure. When 
you are caught up in fabrication, this clarity and purity don't occur. 
If you're not making up anything, then meditation is naturally clear 
and pure. So, (3) without fabrication and (6) rest in innate clarity 
are the third point. 
138. In the space of the three doors of freedom, 
139. Carefolly establish mindfUlness and awareness. 
Meditating with these six methods, the text says, "(rest) in the 
space of the three doors to freedom," which refers to the first three 
methods of non-distraction, non-meditation, and non-fabrication. 
In other texts the three doors to freedom are usually listed as the 
causes free of characteristics, the fruition free of aspiration, and the 
essence, emptiness. However, in Jamgon Kongtrul's text this refers 
PATH MAHAMUDRA 81 
to non-distraction, non-meditation and non-fabrication. When 
Jamgon Kongtrul refers to the space of the three doors, he is referring 
to the mind when it is beyond thoughts of past, present, and future, 
like complete space. So the space of non-distraction, non-meditation, 
and non-fabrication is maintained by mindfulness and awareness. 
Mindfulness and awareness are extremely important in all meditation 
practice. For instance, in the Bodhisattva's Ulay of Life Shantideva 
honors those who meditate with a guarded mind with hands folded, 
praying to them, to maintain mindfulness and awareness because it 
is absolutely necessary on the path. He advises them to guard their 
mindfulness and awareness more carefully than even their very life. 
Shantideva gives the example that the mind is like a door with 
mindfulness and awareness the guards at the door. For instance, in a 
house everyone must come through the door whether they are an 
important guest or a thief. So the door is very important. If thieves 
see that there is a very strong or powerful guard there they won't 
attempt to break in. On the other hand, if they see that there is no 
guard or a very weak one, they will go ahead and attempt to break in 
and steal. The disturbing emotions and discursive thoughts are like 
the thieves or bandits that are trying to steal. Mindfulness and 
awareness are like the guard at the door preventing things from 
being stolen. We can also say the mind is like a bank. Mindfulness 
is like a guard at the door of the bank that needs to be very powerful 
and well equipped with a gun. If the guard isn't powerful and 
vigilant, he can'~ protect the bank. Sometimes mindfulness is lost, 
like in an Indian bank. In India the guard of a bank is supposed to 
be guarding against thieves and bandits but he is also a dangerous 
person because he has a gun. He might just come in and hold up 
the bank himself. So they have the gun chained to a pillar outside 
the door so he can still brandish it around, but he can't go anywhere 
with it himself. This example shows that as well as the guard of 
82 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
mindfulness, we also need awareness to make sure that the 
mindfulness is taking place properly. 
140. The balance of mind between tight and loose must always be kept. 
141. Thus subtle, gross and strong thoughts will be pacified. 
With careful mindfulness and awareness, the mind should be in 
a state of being perfectly toned, neither too loose nor too tight; being 
perfectly balanced between those two at all times. In this way all the 
different kinds of thoughts, subtle discursive thoughts, more obvious 
and very powerful thoughts, will all eventually be pacified. 
14 2. Remain in the state of natural, uncontrived mind. 
143. Gradually, the four grades of experience will arise. 
When thoughts are thus pacified, one can abide within an 
uncontrived, natural state. If one is meditating in that state, the 
experience is of greater and greater clarity and gradually the four 
stages of experience will arise in succession. First one's meditative 
experience is "the waterfall from a high cliff" which is the experience 
of first meditating, because it seems that one has many more 
thoughts and mental disturbances than before one began meditating. 
If one tries to meditate, everything seems much more turbulent 
than before. But in fact it is not more turbulent, it is just that one 
has now taken a look at the mind and naturally understands what 
it is like. So one is now more aware of all the turbulent and subtle 
thoughts that arise. The second stage is the stage of "the flow of a 
river." It is like a great river that is somewhat calmer and more 
peaceful, slowly moving towards the sea. The third stage is "an ocean 
without waves" where the mind is completely still and stabilized 
like a still ocean. The fourth stage is "the sky without clouds" which 
PATH MAHAMUDRA 83 
is an absolutely transparent, dear state, much like water evaporating 
off the ocean. 
144. The sun of luminosity will continuously shine 
145. And the root of Mahamudra meditation will have been planted. 
146. If it is lacking, talk of higher realization 
147. Resembles building a castle without a foundation. 
After these four experiences have gradually come about m 
succession, finally the stage of dear light will take place, or as the 
text says, "the sun of luminosity continuously shine." The mind will 
abide constantly, just like a sun that doesn't rise and set, but is always 
present in a state of clarity. When that happens, one has established 
the foundation of the meditation of Mahamudra. It is stabilized and 
the root has been planted. 
Without having a true or abiding experience of the meditation 
of Mahamudra arising in one's stream of being, just imaging that "I 
have a great experience" won't work. It is just like building a house 
without a foundation. A house needs a strong foundation and without 
it will never be solid or strong. 
148. Yet being too attached to it is an activity of mara. 
There are certain experiences (Tib. nam) that occur when the 
mind is already in great clarity. If these experiences occur, it is very 
good. However, we must not become attached to these experiences. 
As soon as we start to have thoughts like, "This is really important. 
I have attained great clarity" or "I have attained stability of mind," 
then this is called "an activity of mara." The maras were the 
negative forces that tried to keep the Buddha from reaching 
enlightenment. They are not an external demon as they are 
84 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
sometimes portrayed. A mara is more an obstacle to a spiritual 
practice or to our samadhi meditation. 
Sometimes we may have very good meditation with good 
experiences. Many people repeat that their meditation goes very well 
with either good clarity or good abiding; then one day they can't 
seem to retrieve it. One day it is good, then it won't happen again. 
This can create a great deal of hope and anxiety, creating a problem 
in our meditation. We become attached to the good experiences and 
worry about the bad ones. Actually, our view should be that whatever 
experience arises in the mind doesn't matter. If a good experience 
arises, that's very good; if a bad experience arises, it doesn't make any 
difference. This is because the mind is basically a collection of all 
kinds of experiences-good and bad and mixed experiences-that 
constantly arise and there is really no difference of what kind of 
experience it is. Nagarjuna says these meditative experiences and 
people are like mangos. Mangos often look ripe on the outside, but 
when they are opened, they may not be ripe. At other times, mangos 
look like they are not ripe on the outside, but upon opening them 
they are very ripe. So it is with mind-sometimes it has good 
experiences, sometimes it has bad experiences, sometimes it only 
seems to be good or only seems to be bad. But essentially, there really 
isn't any difference between these two conditions. 
149. Those who have studied little, but apply great effort 
150. Are often seduced by seeming virtues, 
151. Guiding themselves and others to the lower realms. 
We shouldn't have any attachment to whatever experience arises. 
Someone who perseveres with effort for a while and feels something 
has happened in their meditation experience might become very 
confused by the experience and start to develop pride, thinking, "Now 
PATH MAHAMUDRA 85 
I really have good qualities." Then that good experience itselfleads 
to confusion so that they are "guiding themselves and others to the 
lower realms." So it is important not to become too attached to 
any expenence. 
I 52. Bliss, clarity, and non-thought may be wonderfUl experiences, 
I 53. But they are causes of samsara if one clings to them. 
Even the very excellent experiences that occur in samadhi such as 
bliss, clarity and non-thought can be the actual cause of samsara if 
there is any kind of fixation or attachment to these experiences. It is 
important never to get attached in this way. 
So, in summary, this chapter described the meaning and actual 
practice of meditation and the possible ways to go astray and the 
mistakes that can happen, and how to avoid them. 
Questions 
Question: What is the relationship between "co-emergent mind" and 
what is called "ordinary mind." 
Rinpoche: The relationship between co-emergence and "ordinary 
mind" or thamal gyi shepa in Tibetan is that they are pretty much the 
same thing. Generally, co-emergence is used to describe the true 
nature of things. Thamal gyi shepa is a very special term used by 
some of the Kagyu lamas because if you have some kind of hope 
when you meditate that you really are going to meditate on this 
fantastic state, on this nature of mind, this wonderful state of mind, 
it could put one into a bad frame of mind. To keep people from 
looking forward to this great fantastic thing, certain Kagyu lamas 
began to use this very uncommon word so that meditators would 
86 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
not have so much hope, because it is actually just very ordinary, 
normal mind. The idea of co-emergence (/hen chig) sounds very 
esoteric and difficult to understand, very far away. However, if we 
translate it as ordinary mind (thamal gyi shepa) it is easier to 
understand, just the uncontrived mind that one already has. 
Question: How do we deal with anger using this Mahamudra 
approach? 
Rinpoche: Looking at the essence of anger-if you have the 
introduction or transmission then there is nothing there, and if you 
realize that, it is pretty much Mahamudra. Usually all the things that 
occur in the mind, whatever they are, happiness, sadness, and so 
forth, you should regard them essentially as, "wind moving in space," 
as it says in some commentaries. No matter how much wind blows 
in space, nothing is harmed. In that way, when kleshas or happiness 
or sadness arise there is no problem whatsoever. You have to realize 
that. You have to stabilize it, you have to meditate. 
Question: Could you please explain the relationship between having 
the view and meditating 
Rinpoche: First there is the sutra tradition according to the view of 
Middle-way, there is emptiness, and emptiness is like such and such. 
There is the Buddha-nature which pervades all beings, and it is like 
such and such. Clearly contemplating these things is a kind of 
understanding that comes from mental activity. Thinking about it 
and figuring it out-"this must be what it is like" and so on, then a 
kind of experience takes place. 
Secondly, based on experience, then an authentic lama gives a 
pointing out experience of mind's nature. Whether or not the 
individual has a good understanding of the texts or not, the lama 
says, "Sit here, look at your mind and meditate!" Then the lama 
PATH MAHAMUDRA 87 
asks, "What arises?" "What is mind?" "What is it like?" "Where is 
it?" Some lamas like Trungpa Rinpoche give an introduction to 
ordinary mind. This is giving the view based on experience. Once 
you have this view, then you meditate on it. So it is the view based 
on the introduction or transmission, and is followed up by 
meditation. 
Question: Why is view and meditation inseparable? 
Rinpoche: View is like the door. Then contemplating again and again, 
eventually, whenever you meditate it is there. When the view is first 
introduced it is not yet stable. You think, "Oh yes, that is probably 
so" or, "Oh, maybe not, that is not really it" and so on, with many 
fluctuations. Then when you have meditational experience of it, 
whenever you meditate, you arrive exactly right on it. 
Question: Do the four experiences come after mind is abiding in its 
own place? 
Rinpoche: The Tibetan word rang bab means falling on itself or, by 
itself, and refers to the natural essence of mind. Abiding in that means 
that if you can maintain it, it will gradually increase and grow until 
you are actually abiding in it. So the four experiences describe that 
process. The essence is revealed, but then practice makes it actually 
happen. Just by persevering in meditation the four experiences will 
arise by stages. 

5 
Obstacles in the 
Practice of Mahamudra 
II. PATH MAHAMUDRA 'v hARE CONTINUING WITII THE explanation of path Mahamudra, W a~d the second of the three parts, the various obstacles and 
errors that can occur in the practice of Mahamudra. 
154. Having hammered the nail of devotion into your heart 
155. When rock hits bone in natural awareness 
156. The ultimate lineage of blessing is transferred. 
The main methods for avoiding obstructions and errors to 
spiritual practice are devotion and perseverance. With these two 
qualities, the blessings of realization are transferred to our mind stream 
and obstructions and errors are eliminated. 
When the text says to fix or even hammer in the nail of devotion 
into one's heart, it is stressing devotion. How should we develop 
devotion and nail it to our heart? Just as when you nail some object 
in place so that it becomes very strong and immovable, in the same 
way, if we have intense devotion then our mind becomes extremely 
90 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
strong and stable. So, in general, the method for attaining stability 
is to develop this unshakable devotion. 
Once we have nailed devotion to our heart, then, "rock hits bone 
in natural awareness." Only when rock hits bone at exactly the right 
place will it break. It is an old example for precision. If we have 
devotion, stability of mind, and great perseverance, then the blessings 
of the absolute lineage are transferred. These blessings are as if the 
realization of the lineage masters, from Vajradhara right down to 
our own root lama, all that experiential realization that is in the 
mind streams of all those lamas, is transferred to our own mind 
stream, and arises in us. 
157. Not getting lost in the four types of deviations, 
To achieve the realization of the absolute lineage we must 
eliminate the four deviations (Tib. shorba). These deviations all 
have to do with incorrectly understanding emptiness. The first 
deviation we must eliminate is getting lost in emptiness as the basis 
of things. This is thinking that there is really nothing at all-there 
are no appearances, no emptiness, nothing exists at all. It is when 
we really don't understand the true nature of emptiness and we 
cling to the idea of it as nothing at all. This error in understanding 
is the first deviation. 
Second is the deviation of getting lost in emptiness as the path. 
This occurs when we believe that emptiness means that there is no 
such thing as accumulating merit or accumulating negative karma. 
Believing this, we don't accumulate positive actions and avoid 
negative ones. In other words, the deviation is not taking into 
account karmic cause and effect and this is the second deviation 
on the path. 
OBSTACLES IN THE PRACTICE OF MAHAMUDRA 91 
The third deviation is believing that emptiness is the remedy. 
When we do not believe emptiness is the natural state of both the 
disturbing emotions and the remedies we make a mistake; we do not 
understand that what is to be eliminated and its remedy are 
inseparable in essence. The deviation is that one may think every 
time a disturbing emotion arises we have to meditate on emptiness 
using emptiness as a remedy. This is not the correct attitude because 
this way we do not recognize the essence, we only use a concept of 
emptiness as a seeming opposite. 
The fourth deviation is applying the label or seal of emptiness. 
This occurs when a thought arises and we think that this or that is 
emptiness, or we do some work and think "this is emptiness." First 
we cling to the idea that external phenomena are real things, then 
when we learn about emptiness, we begin to think that everything is 
emptiness. This way of intellectualizing isn't any good either. 
158. Not falling into the three errors, 
Based on the blessings, one won't stray into these four deviations, 
and then not fall into the three errors. The four deviations relate to 
the practice ofVipashyana, and the three errors to Shamatha. 
The three errors relate to the three kinds of temporary 
experiences one can have in Shamatha practice: bliss, clarity, and 
non-thought. One shouldn't have attachment to these experiences. 
If the experience of bliss arises, don't be attached to it. If experiences 
of clarity or non-thought arise, it is necessary to be unattached. If, 
however, one is attached to the experience of bliss, then within the 
three realms of existence, one will not be able to go beyond the 
Desire Realm. If there is attachment to the experience of clarity, 
one will not transcend the Form Realm. And if there is attachment 
92 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
to the experience of non-thought, one cannot pass beyond the 
Formless Realm. So with attachment to bliss, one errs or is caught 
in the Desire Realm, with attachment to clarity one errs or is caught 
in the Form Realm, and with attachment to non-thought one errs or 
is caught in the Formless Realm. 26 
159. Surpassing the four joys, free from the three conditions, 
So the biggest faults are the four deviations and the three errors. 
If we avoid the four deviations and the three errors, then we experience 
going beyond the four joys. The four joys are part of the path of 
means which is the practice of working with the subtle energies using 
the prana, the hindus, and the nadis. The four experiences or joys 
are: sublime joy; exceptional joy; transcendent joy and; free of joy, 
which means going even beyond joy. In general, these four joys relate 
to the path of means, the practices concerning channels and winds 
(prana). However, the kind of realization that is generated here is 
beyond the four joys. 
One should also be "free from the three conditions" (Tib. rkyen 
gsum). The three conditions or temporary experiences (Tib. nams) 
are, again, bliss, clarity and non-thought. In the previous instance, 
the three experiences were mentioned in the context of attachment 
to the experience in meditation, which would be the cause of 
continued cycling in the three realms. Here, this freedom from the 
three conditions should be understood to mean that these temporary 
experiences will dissipate by themselves; the experience neither 
benefits nor harms, they occur naturally. When this has occurred, it 
is "freedom from the three conditions." In general, these experiences 
are considered good. However, they can cause the meditation to be 
unstable. If there is freedom from these three experiences and one is 
OBSTACLES IN THE PRACTICE OF MAHAMUDRA 93 
just naturally happy, relaxed and peaceful, our meditation will be 
without a problem. 
160. And connecting with the three ways of arising, 
161. we won't be troubled by the mind of the three great ones. 
"Connecting with the three ways of arising" refers to the three 
ways that good qualities, described previously, can arise. They can 
arise either gradually in stages, by leaping over (Tib. togyal) or, arise 
all at once. Usually, the qualities arise gradually in stages, but 
sometimes they "leap over," that is, they skip a stage and go directly 
to the next one. It is like climbing a ladder and you skip one or two 
of the rungs. Finally, there are times when the qualities of practice 
arise all at the same time without going through the stages. 
Not being "troubled by the mind of the three great ones" refers 
to being free of the three faults of the three stages of practice. The 
first stage (or first prajna) arises as the result of listening to the 
teachings. Listening or learning means the mere understanding that 
arises from reading a lot of books. Sometimes this kind of 
understanding is confused with real experiential realization. One 
needs to get beyond knowledge. This kind of knowledge of purely 
intellectual understanding won't help. So confusing intellectual 
understanding with real understanding can cause the first fault. The 
second stage of practice comes from contemplation of what we have 
heard. This understanding based on analytical reasoning can also be 
confused with realization. This also must be transcended. Third is 
the experience that comes from meditation. At first there are various 
temporary experiences that arise in meditation that are not true 
realization. We must develop the realization that transcends various 
transitory meditational experiences. So being untroubled by the three 
great ones refers to: realization beyond any exaggeration in listening, 
94 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
in contemplating, or in meditation, not mistaking their positive result 
for the realization itself. In practicing Mahamudra meditation, we 
need to make these clear distinctions between these faults and the 
qualities of true realization. 
162. The self-arisen nature is not changed by experiences. 
163. It resembles the center of a cloudless sky. 
Jamgon Kongtrul then says "the self-arisen nature is not changed 
by experiences." This is the realization of the real, genuine character of 
the true nature, not simply one's meditative experiences. When that is 
realized, it is like "the center of a cloudless sky," which is extremely 
open, clear and transparent without limit or disturbing perceptions. 
164. Self-aware, se/filluminating, it can't be put in words. 
165. It is primordial wisdom beyond analogy or concepts. 
Our intrinsic awareness (Tib. rigpa) that arises naturally from our 
realization is naturally clear or self-illuminating (Tib. rang gse/). It is 
impossible to describe this nature of mind either in words or analogy 
or concepts. We cannot find any example which can accurately 
describe primordial wisdom. 
166. The nakedness of ordinary mind 
167. Without anything to understand or to boast about, 
168. Is clearly seen as the dharmakaya. 
This primordial wisdom is "the nakedness of ordinary mind." It 
is ordinary mind or the nature of the mind itself in its natural state 
without any contrivance or contortion. Stark or "naked" means 
OBSTACLES IN THE PRACTICE OF MAHAMUDRA 95 
without any discursive thoughts or concepts. One must really see 
the essential nature of the mind, so it is naked. 
Since it is naked, and therefore clear, there is nothing to 
understand and be arrogant about. There being nothing to understand 
means the mind is there so clearly one automatically understands 
"this seems to be ordinary mind." But it is not like that. Arrogance 
or self-righteousness is when one thinks for sure, "Ah hah, this is 
really it," and deciding that is it. Without these two attitudes, just 
the naked experience and the appreciation of it without being 
corrupted by those two faulty positions of concepts and false 
certainty, when one really sees naked ordinary mind, then it is the 
actual vision of dharmakaya. 
169. The six sense objects appear like the moon in water, 
170. In the sphere of primordial wisdom. 
At that point we will be free of any faults or problems. The text 
says, "the six sense objects appear like the moon in water." When we 
have reached the level of primordial wisdom (Tib. yeshe), although 
we see sights, hears sounds, smell smells, taste flavors, feel objects of 
touch, and have various thoughts arise in our consciousness, the 
various perceptions of the six senses are like the moon appearing in a 
still lake at night. The moon does indeed appear in the water, but 
there is no power to it and no actual thing there. It is just a reflection. 
In the same way, when we actually realize the naked ordinary mind, 
we shall experience the perceptions of the six senses, they will still 
arise, but there is no attachment to them, no harm done by them, 
and they make no great impact on us. 
For this reason when beautiful and desirable objects are seen, 
there is no reaction of desire and attachment. When disgusting or 
ugly sights are seen, no anger or hatred arises. There is just the natural 
96 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
state, like seeing the moon in water which is "the sphere of primordial 
wisdom" meaning that everything arises within wisdom and then 
naturally subsides, without attachment. There is just arising and 
natural subsiding. 
171. Whatever arises is unfobricated, the innate state. 
172. Whatever is perceived has the nature of Mahamudra. 
173. The phenomenal world is the great bliss of the dharmakaya. 
Externally, all the outer objects of the senses and, internally, the 
thoughts arising to consciousness are, without any fabrication at all, 
they just naturally arise without attachment. The arising is naturally 
in its basic true nature, without contrivance. For this reason, whether 
the outer objects of perception or the inner thoughts, all are the 
nature of Mahamudra. If we can maintain this state then we will 
realize the nature of Mahamudra. 
Then "the phenomenal world is the great bliss of the 
dharmakaya." Whatever appears and arises in samsara is naturally 
seen as the dharmakaya. And since the dharmakaya is completely 
free from suffering, it is great bliss. 
174. Meditation finding naturally its own place is Shamatha, 
175. Seeing the unseeable nature is Vipashyana 
176. In all phases ofstillness, movement and awareness 
177. These two are not separate, but coincide. 
When we reach this state of seeing everything as the dharmakaya, 
we begin to meditate on the union of Shamatha and Vipashyana. 
This meditation is an undisturbed state (Shamatha) and, 
understanding the actual meaning of seeing the unseen (Vipashyana); 
realizing the natural abiding state of Shamatha and Vipashyana 
OBSTACLES IN THE PRACTICE OF MAHAMUDRA 97 
manifest in seeing the unseen true nature of mind. These two must 
arise together. 
In general, there are three phases of mind: stillness, mental 
activity, and awareness. The first, stillness, arises during Shamatha 
meditation, and one has the experience of"now my mind is still, it is 
abiding." Secondly, there is movement or mental activity, when the 
mind is not still, but thoughts are active. Without any investigation 
the mind appears to be in one of these two states: either still or 
moving. However, when we really investigate what the difference 
between the still and moving mind is, we find that their essence is 
actually the same! If there is stillness, one can't say "this is the stillness," 
if there is movement, one can't point to the movement. Because the 
essence of stillness and movement is the same, this is awareness. Seeing 
that the nature of these two is no different represents awareness, the 
third phase. But this implies that: 
178. The confusion of discursive thought is not to be abandoned 
179. The virtuous action of the antidotes cannot be achieved. 
180. The time will come when you arrive naturally at this state. 
Stillness, movement, and awareness are not separate states of mind 
but a unity. We should realize the essential sameness of all three of 
them. Movement is no different than stillness, and when stillness 
occurs, it is no different than movement; they are the same. Thoughts 
arise, but if we are aware of this identity of the essence of stillness 
and movement, then the emanations of discursive thought need not 
be rejected. Even though thoughts are arising they do not really change 
the nature of mind. So there is no need to reject them, there are no 
antidotes to be applied to them. Eventually we will naturally rest in 
this state. 
98 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
181. When you are well established in this realization, 
182. You1l never be outside of meditation 
183. At the borderline between freedom and attainment 
184. Even meditation itself has no existence. 
When the realization of Mahamudra becomes stable and goes 
well and no other obstacles or faults can occur, when we can really 
meditate on whether thoughts are still or moving, when we can 
meditate in good conditions or terrible conditions, then there is the 
meditative state only and we will never be outside meditation, 
because everything is meditation without a single thing not being 
meditation. At that time we will be "at the borderline between 
freedom and attainment" meaning we cannot say we are free of 
meditation or without meditation nor can we define the meditation 
itself in any way. 
185. But beginners, whose discursive mind has not subsided 
186. Should highly cherish meditation. 
Beginners who have many discursive thoughts must really meditate. 
6 
Progress Through 
the Various Stages 
II. PATH MAHAMUDRA 
THIS CHAPTER DESCRIBES HOW WE gradually progress through the 
stages of realization. It is the third section of the path 
Mahamudra. 
187. By means of meditation, experiences come up. 
188. Experiences arise as adornments of awareness. 
For the beginner, meditation is very important and it gives rise 
to experience. Of course, the experience doesn't always seem like a 
good experience. Sometimes the experience arising from meditation 
can be the feeling of meditation getting more difficult. Sometimes 
we feel we have progressed, sometimes we feel we are getting worse. 
However, these experiences are just effects of the meditation and we 
should not worry about them. Rather, we should just be aware of 
them and see them as useful, irrespective of whether they seem good 
or bad: They are just due to meditation. 
In the practice of meditation, both the awareness of the nature 
of mind and the experiences that arise through meditation are 
100 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
mutually conducive. They help each other. The experiences of 
meditation, whether good or bad experiences, enhance the awareness 
of the nature of mind. If we look at it from this point of view they 
function as adornments of our awareness. 
189. If one wants to divide the path, there are four yo gas: 
Stage by stage the experiences and realizations gradually increase. 
In Buddhism these are usually classified into five paths and the ten 
bodhisattva levels (Skt. bhumt) that the practitioner passes through 
on the way to realization. Similarly, based on the experience of 
Mahamudra that the great meditators and great lamas had, the stages 
of Mahamudra were divided into four stages called the four yogas. 
Yoga is a Sanskrit word for "unity" and this was translated into 
Tibetan as naljor. The way that yoga is used in Hinduism is different 
from the way it is used in Buddhism. Generally, yoga is thought of 
in terms of physical exercises or the method of using various exercises 
to attain mastery over the body. This is not what "yoga" means in 
Buddhism at all. In Tibetan nal means the true state, the essence, the 
nature of mind. The second syllable jor means "to engage" or "to 
apply." So nal jor means "to reach a certain level of realization based 
on the experience of the nature of the mind." In the case of the four 
yogas it means the progressive refining of the experience of the natural 
state (Tib. nalma), where it is actualized progressively in four parts. 
190. Knowing mind's own face is "one-pointedness" 
191. And has lesser, intermediate and greater stages. 
The Mahamudra path is special, meaning it is not shared by 
other Buddhist meditations. The first yoga or stage is called one­
pointedness. This occurs after having been introduced to the nature 
PROGRESS THROUGH THE VARIOUS STAGES 101 
of mind or given the transmission of the ordinary mind. There is 
some actual recognition of ordinary mind, the nature of mind. This 
is further divided into the lesser, the medium, and the greater stage 
of one-pointedness. 
The lesser one-pointedness is the experience of the alternating 
experiences of bliss and luminosity. Sometimes one experiences bliss, 
sometimes one experiences luminosity, sometimes neither. The 
medium one-pointedness occurs when one gains some control over 
meditation, by settling the mind in equipoise. In the beginning of 
trying to meditate one wants to stay one-pointedly in meditation 
but one cannot. One wants to achieve good samadhi, yet one hasn't 
the ability. Even when trying to rest the mind in calm abiding, it 
doesn't dwell in one place. In the stage of the medium one-pointedness 
one has some control and power over one's samadhi and one's ability 
to meditate, so that one can meditate whenever one wishes. 
192. Seeing bliss and luminosity in alternation, 
193. Obtaining mastery over the concentration of meditative equipoise. 
194. And uninterrupted experience of luminous appearances. 
The experience of the greater one-pointedness occurs with the 
arising of luminosity, of great clear light. Of the two experiences of 
emptiness and luminosity, luminosity is getting very strong and arises 
very powerfully at this point. There is no longer a difference of 
whether there is samadhi or no samadhi: one abides in this experience 
of luminosity continuously. 
195. Realizing the rootlessness of mind is "no elaboration" 
196. And has lesser. intermediate, and greater stages: 
197. Realizing that arising, ceasing and abiding are empty. 
102 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
As one's experience is enhanced continuously, the second yoga is 
called the stage of simplicity, the stage without conception or 
elaboration. This is when the real realization of emptiness, the 
realization that the mind is without root, without a basis, becomes a 
strong experience. This stage is also divided into three levels of 
experience: the lesser, the medium, and the greater experience. The 
lesser stage of"no elaboration" is the realization of the emptiness of 
any event in the mind such as the arising, abiding, and cessation of 
thoughts. Realizing the mind without foundation means that at the 
beginning there was nothing arising; in the end there is nothing that 
could cease and in the middle there is nothing abiding. 
198. Being free from the fundamental root of clinging to appearances 
or clinging to emptiness, 
199. And cutting through all exaggerations caused by elaborating 
on phenomena. 
The medium level of no elaboration comes about after the 
realization of no origination, no cessation, and no abiding. The 
clinging to external appearances or objects disappears because one 
recognizes the emptiness of all external phenomena. Clinging to 
thinking all phenomena are empty is also transcended. So one's 
experience is completely free of clinging to appearances or clinging 
to emptiness. 
The final level of this stage is cutting completely through all 
designations or all embellishment of all dharmas, of all phenomena. 
"All phenomena" means not only external objects, but also the mind. 
So any extreme view is cut through, such as thinking that (a) it exists 
or (b) that it doesn't exist or (c) that it neither exists nor doesn't exist 
or (d) that it both exists and doesn't exist. All four extremes are cut 
off, and no designation of any kind is made by the mind. In the surra 
PROGRESS THROUGH THE VARIOUS STAGES 103 
tradition this is called going beyond the four extremes, the four 
elaborations, or the thirty-two exaggerations. These all are basically 
the same thing. In actual meditative experience it is said that any 
kind of designation, embellishment or elaboration of any extreme 
is removed. 
200. Mixing appearances and mind is "one-taste" 
201. And has lesser, intermediate, and greater stages: 
202. Mixing the dharmas of the two kinds into one equal taste. 
203. Appearances and mind become like water poured into water. 
204. And many types of primordial wisdom arising from one taste. 
The third yoga or stage is called single flavor or the experience 
of single value of one taste. 27 The primary experience of this level is 
the experience of the inseparability of appearance and mind. That is 
to say that the outer appearances of phenomena and the inner mind 
which apprehends phenomena are both felt to be of the same value. 
There is no difference. This third level also is divided into the lesser, 
medium, and greater stages. 
The lesser stage is "mixing the dharmas of the two kinds into 
one equal taste." This stage is when experiences of duality are 
combined into a single flavor. Normally, we experience external 
phenomena as one thing and the mind as a separate thing. We have 
an external fixation on phenomena and an internal fixation on our 
subjective person. We also think in terms of self and other, so anything 
to do with the mind is self and anything appearing externally is 
believed to be other. This leads to a lot of incorrect perceptions. The 
force and the power of the previous two levels of one-pointedness 
and no-elaboration bring ahout the experience of this duality 
becoming completely mixed into a single flavor. It is the fruition of 
the previous two yogas. 
104 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
In the middle level "appearances and mind become like water 
poured into water." In this level our experience of one taste is 
enhanced and is likened to the experience of water being poured 
into water. The external appearances of things are recognized as no 
different from the mind, and the mind is recognized to have the 
ability of arising in any way. There is absolutely no differentiation 
between external phenomena and internal phenomena of the mind. 
So it is like water being poured into water. 
In the greater level we have many types of primordial wisdom 
arising from one taste. This occurs when external phenomena and 
mental phenomena, appearances and emptiness blend into one 
another and one reaches the stage of there being one flavor of 
everything. However, this isn't a state of stupidity where nothing is 
taking place in a big blend of everything. Rather, our mind with its 
eight consciousnesses transforms or manifests into the five wisdoms. 
From abiding in the state of everything blended, the five wisdoms­
the all-accomplishing wisdom, the discriminating wisdom, the 
wisdom of equanimity, the mirror-like wisdom, and dharmadhatu 
wisdom-are not mixed together. Instead, they are very specific, very 
vivid, so that there is more enhancement of wisdom and insight, 
rather than a state of stupidity. 
205. The complete purification of rigid mind is "non-meditation" 
206. And has lesser, intermediate and greater stages: 
207. Being free from all ideas of meditation and meditator. 
After this experience of the single flavor, one reaches the fourth 
yoga or level called the stage of non-meditation. Through the power 
of becoming habituated to meditation we reach a stage in which we 
no longer distinguish between meditating and not meditating. This 
PROGRESS THROUGH THE VARIOUS STAGES 105 
is when we are liberated in dharmadhatu, when "rigid mind" or 
discursive thoughts have naturally subsided. 
The stage of non-meditation is also divided into three. At the 
lowest level of non-meditation one experiences no difference between 
the meditation itself and the meditator; there is no person meditating 
and no meditation. We realize that in the essence of the dharmadhatu 
there naturally are no such distinctions. 
208. Gradually purifying the imprint of the veils of knowledge 
The medium stage of non-meditation is said to be when the 
imprint of conceptual obscurations are completely purified. 
Generally, we talk about the two kinds of veils or obscurations: the 
emotional obscurations and the intellectual obscurations, which is 
seeing things dualistically in terms of perceived appearances and 
perceiving mind. 28 Not only are the obscurations cleared away at 
this stage but even the imprints of seeing things this way are 
gradually purified. 
209. And the mixing of the mother and child clear light. 
210. The primordial wisdom of the dharmadhatu pervades space. 
The final level of the stage of non-meditation is called the "mixing 
of the mother and child clear light," or the meeting of the mother 
and child luminosity. This luminosity has many names. Sometimes 
it is called the primordial wisdom which sees things as they are; 
Mahamudra, dharmadhatu, or tathagatagarbha, All of these refer to 
the same basic luminosity which has two aspects called "mother 
luminosity" and "child luminosity." The mother luminosity is the 
actual true nature of mind. It is the unchangeable part of mind, the 
dharmata, which is always present as a foundation of Buddhahood 
106 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
until it has been reached. The child luminosity is the path of 
meditation we progress along slowly and gradually with the experience 
of clear light gradually increasing bit by bit until we finally realize 
this stage of non-meditation. We then realize that this growing 
realization is the same as the original nature of all things and that it 
was always there. So this is like mixing the original mother luminosity 
and the developed child luminosity and recognizing them as the same 
thing all along. 
The realization of this final level of non-meditation is all­
pervasive. The wisdom of dharmadhatu expands throughout space 
pervading all phenomena. It is then present all the time whether we 
are meditating or not, without ever ceasing to be. In all there are 
twelve specific levels specified on the path ofMahamudra (three levels 
of each of the four stages). Even if these levels might be too advanced 
for us right now, this knowledge will help us to progress and improve 
our meditation in the correct direction in the future. 
211. In short, as for as meditation is concerned· 
212. If the mind can dwell according to our wishes, this is one-pointedness. 
213. One then sees the face of ordinary mind. 
We have a brief summary of the four yogas. The text says, "If the 
mind can dwell according to our wishes, this is one-pointedness." In 
terms of resting in equipoise, when the mind can dwell as long as it 
wants and there is some control this is one-pointedness-the first 
yoga. The quality of one-pointedness is that one really sees the nature 
of ordinary mind, meaning one experiences ordinary mind directly, 
not intellectually. 
214. Realizing that there is no foundation is "no elaboration. " 
PROGRESS THROUGH THE VARIOUS STAGES 107 
Then in the second yoga of"no elaboration," we basically realize 
there is no root, and we are completely free of a foundation. When 
looking at the essence of the movement of mind or looking at the 
essence of the still mind we see them to be of the same nature. Neither 
of them has a foundation nor a root and so they are essentially the 
same. Then there is no longer an essential distinction between the 
mind either abiding or moving. 
215. Liberating all dualistic perception 
216. In awareness is ''one-taste. " 
Then whatever clinging or fixation there is to duality of external 
appearance and internal mind, self and other, is liberated through 
the experience of meditation. In the very recognition of awareness 
this duality is liberated. And this, in short, is the state of one-taste, 
the third yoga. 
217. Transcending all conventional terms of meditating or not meditating, 
218. The imprints are ended. This is "non-meditation. " 
Finally, in the next stage we no longer are able to designate a 
certain state as meditation and another state as non-meditation. The 
distinction between these two is completely transcended and has 
become completely irrelevant. Any habitual pattern or imprints of 
the obscurations of emotions or the obscurations to knowledge are 
transcended. This is the fourth yoga of non-meditation. 
This then is the description of the twelve stages within the four 
yogas. This is also described in detail in Tashi Namgyal's Moonbeams 
ofMahamudra in which the method of categorizing experiences into 
these twelve stages is compared with the normal Buddhist approach 
of the five paths and ten bodhisattva stages. 29 Tashi Namgyal in a 
108 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
scholarly approach explains which of the twelve stages is related to 
which bodhisattva stage in great detail. Whereas this song of 
Mahamudra by Jamgon Kongtrul is a spiritual song of inspiration 
which comes from direct personal experience, the whole purpose for 
Tashi Namgyal (1512-1587 C.E.) in writing Moonbeams of 
Mahamudra was to refute the Sakya Pandita who said the whole idea 
of Mahamudra was not really a valid or authentic path. The Sakya 
Pandita said that to do this kind of stupid Mahamudra meditation 
would result only in being born as an animal or ending up in the 
form or formless realms, so it wasn't really a true method. So Tashi 
Namgyal thought he definitely had to refute this. Actually, he asked 
Drukpa Padma Karpo, another great lama, to write a book in 
refutation of all the accusations of Sakya Pandita. But Padma Karpo 
wouldn't do it. So Tashi Namgyal had to do it himself. Tashi Namgyal 
says in Moonbeams of Mahamudra that most people who have had 
experience of Mahamudra don't know how to write about it because 
they are not learned enough to say anything about it. And those who 
are learned enough to say anything about it have had no meditation 
experience of it. And still others who have both the experience and 
the scholarship do not have the altruistic mind to do it. He was 
referring to Padma Karpo, because he wouldn't compose this as if he 
didn't have an altruistic motivation. Then Takpo Tashi Namgyal says, 
"I am not learned in this experience, but at least I have the thought 
of benefiting others by writing this book." In this book he refutes 
the accusations ofSakya Pandita by saying that maybe it is true that 
if you meditate like an idiot or you meditate on stupid Mahamudra, 
you would be born as an animal. But this is not the fault of the 
dharma, that is the fault of being an idiot. 
219. Those on the level of the great yogins, 
220. Starting with Naropa and Maitripa, 
PROGRESS THROUGH THE VARIOUS STAGES 109 
221. Down to my venerable lama Pema Wangpo, 
222. Those belonging to the golden garland of the Kagyu 
223. Have gone to the dharmakaya kingdom of non-meditation, 
224. They have purified the darkness of the two veils in the dhatu 
225. Extended the great skill of the two kinds of knowledge 
226. And opened the treasury that pervades space for the benefit of others. 
The meditator who goes through all twelve levels and increases 
the experience as described in this text is called a great yogi. This 
kind of yogi has existed from the beginning of the Kagyu lineage 
with Naropa and Maitripa right down to Jamgon Kongtrul's own 
lama Perna Nyingche Wangpo. All of these have been masters who 
have reached this final stage of non-meditation in which all faults 
have been completely eradicated and who have the good qualities 
described. They have reached the kingdom of the dharmakaya. The 
main things which they abandoned were the two veils or obscurations: 
the obscurations of emotions and the obscurations of knowledge. 
With these two veils being completely purified, the knowledge of all 
ultimate phenomena and the knowledge of all conventional 
phenomena develops. These two wisdoms increase and then help all 
sentient beings. It is like opening the treasure of the sky which 
completely pervades throughout space. 
227. They remain as a refuge beyond doubt. 
228. The ora/lineage has been passed .from one to another 
229. This means that it is not just words, but the meaning that counts. 
Because these faults have been abandoned, the qualities which 
have been obtained, and the activity for the benefit of beings has 
been made, these lineage lamas have become a source of refuge. One 
doesn't have to wonder whether they have the ability to provide refuge 
110 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
because in the Kagyu lineage, Mahamudra teachings have been passed 
on from one lama to another. Each lama received the complete 
instructions. The student then relied on these instructions and 
attained realization and then, in turn, became worthy of passing on 
those instructions. In this way, not just the words of the realization 
have been passed on, but every one in the lineage was also a holder of 
this meaning, so the true meaning of the instructions were passed 
along also. 
230. Even though I am an undisciplined, vile ordinary person 
231. As I am holding the sign of your noble lineage, 
232. Please lead me quickly to the kingdom of non-meditation. 
233. Kind ones, please completely purify my rigid mind in the dhatu. 
Jamgon Kongtrul adds a supplication to the ending of this 
discussion on path Mahamudra. In his supplication he says he is an 
"undisciplined, vile ordinary person," meaning a person under the 
influence of disturbing emotions, undisciplined, and lazy. He says, 
even though I am like that, at least I have entered into the Kagyu 
lineage. He says, all I have is this sign that I am Kagyu and asks to 
please bring him quickly to the kingdom of non-meditation, where 
"rigid mind," all discursive thought and concepts are completely 
purified in the dharmadhatu. 
Questions 
Question: It seems to me that in our particular sangha the idea of 
one-taste is interpreted as meaning that we don't have any more 
preferences, that anything goes, that if it is too hot, that is one-taste, 
that is okay then. If the steaks comes well done when you asked for it 
PROGRESS THROUGH THE VARIOUS STAGES Ill 
medium rare, that is fine, you feel just fine about that. I like to know 
really if one-taste means that. 
Rinpoche: Yes, this is one flavor, but it also includes the aspect of 
knowing or awareness. It is not like you are not aware that the steak 
is overdone, you have an awareness of it. But the state of not having 
attachment to anything nice and, not having aversion to anything 
unpleasant, is an experience of one flavor. 

7 
Fruition Mahamttdra 
III. FRUITION MAHAMUDRA 
234. Fruition Mahamudra is concerned with: 
Fruition Mahamudra is the actualization of the Mahamudra 
experience. As an ordinary person we are not aware of our own true 
nature and that is the ground Mahamudra. Then through the 
teachings of the Buddha and the teachings of our root lama we are 
introduced to that nature and we learn that our true nature exists 
and we have Buddha-nature within ourselves. But it is not enough 
to simply know that it exists, we need to have realization brought 
about by meditation, which is the path Mahamudra. When the path 
is actualized, then we have fruition Mahamudra. 
235. The ground is introduced as one's own face, the innate three kayas; 
236. The path consists in concentrating on the view and meditation; 
237. And the fruition is the manifestation of the immaculate three kayas. 
We begin with a brief explanation in these verses. Foundation 
Mahamudra is completely unfabricated, innate, just as it is. If one 
recognizes it, it doesn't become better. If one doesn't recognize it, it 
doesn't become worse. The ground has the nature of the three kayas; 
114 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
the unborn basis of the dharmakaya, the unceasing radiance of the 
sambhogakaya, and the energy of manifesting of the nirmanakaya. 
These three are present as the natural state Mahamudra. Through 
meeting exceptional teachers and relying on their special methods 
and exceptional instructions, ordinary mind can be realized. This is 
only possible because there is this foundation. 
It is not enough to have an introduction to this true nature 
because through endless lifetimes up to now we have become 
habituated to certain conditioned patterns including many negative 
patterns. So when we sit to meditate after being introduced to this 
ground Mahamudra, sometimes flashes of realization of this true 
nature occur, but then again these are swept away by the power of 
confusion. When this happens, the recognition of the basic 
foundation becomes impure or imperfect. So as well as the view, one 
needs to bring home the crucial point of meditation, really 
concentrate in meditation. 
Developing the perfect view with meditation will result in the 
confusion or illusory beliefs diminishing and disappearing. Then 
primordial wisdom will be able to flourish more and more. This 
meditation on view will result in the actualization of the three kayas 
without any stain or blemish. The primary stains are the two 
olm:urations: the obscurations of the emotions (the kleshas) and the 
obscurations to knowledge. 
238. The dharmakaya is the basis, emptiness without any elaboration. 
The actualization of the three kayas at the time of the fruition 
Mahamudra has three qualities. The first is described by the Tibetan 
word shi, which means the "nature," the basis," or "character." The 
word shi here means the true nature. In the more colloquial Tibetan 
the word shi is used to mean a person's character, such as if the person 
FRUITION MAHAMUDRA 115 
has a good character or a bad character. The basic underlying character 
of all phenomena and of the mind itself is emptiness. This essence is, 
furthermore, completely free from any kind of conceptualization or 
elaboration of whether it actually exists or doesn't exist. The emptiness 
of the character or nature itself is the dharmakaya. 
The Sanskrit word dharmakaya is made of the word "dharma" 
and "kaya." The word "dharma" was translated into Tibetan as cho. 
The Sanskrit word "dharma'' is "holding," in the sense of holding 
one from falling into suffering of the three lower realms. When this 
word was translated by the great translators into Tibetan, they chose 
the word "cho" which means to improve or remedy a situation. For 
instance, one would use cho if a person were sick and needed to be 
made well, one would remedy their sickness. Although there is a 
slight difference in these words (cho spelled chos being "dharma" and 
cho spelled bcos meaning "curing"), the meaning is the same because 
both of them imply a certain capability. For instance, to prevent 
something from falling so that it doesn't fall (dharma) is similar to 
the ability to save it (cho). Similarly, to improve one's faults or improve 
one's sickness also implies this ability or capability. So in both cases 
the actual meaning is the same. The second part of dharmakaya is 
"kaya," which literally means "body," but in this context has nothing 
to do with body or form. It is a word to indicate the basis or 
foundation or the root of the dharma. The foundation of that ability 
is that capability implied in the word dharma. 
239. The sambhogakaya is its brilliance, the naturally luminous. 
When we say the basic character or nature is empty, it is not the 
same as when we say a house is empty or the sky is empty. This kind 
of emptiness means completely devoid of anything, nothing there to 
change and nothing there to rake place. However, when we use 
116 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
"empty" in terms of the nature of mind, it means this essence is 
essentially empty of anything substantial, yet it has a certain capacity, 
a certain brilliance or radiance. Radiance is this aspect of appearing, 
rather than the aspect of being empty. Even though the essence is 
empty, it has this unceasing radiance or energy, the nature of clarity 
or luminosity. This brilliance (Tib. dang), this clarity or luminosity 
(Tib. salwa), is the nature of the sambhogakaya. 
Sambhogakaya in Tibetan is long cho dzok pay ku with longcho 
meaning, having possessions or pleasures, having everything that you 
could possibly need. It allows for all pleasures and all possessions to 
arise for oneself and others. The second part dzok pay means 
"complete" or "perfected." So all possessions, enjoyments, all 
happiness is perfected in the sambhogakaya. 
240. The nirmanakaya is the unceasing play of various manifestations 
This luminosity has a certain power or energy to it. It is like a 
wild animal. It is very powerful and there is nothing that it can't do 
with its power, its force. This force can manifest as all the varied 
phenomena of the world and there is no way of blocking or impeding 
it. This energy manifests without anything being able to impede it. 
This quality, this energy, or force is termed the "nirmanakaya." 
Nirmanakaya or tulku in Tibetan literally means "emanated" or 
"emanation body." The dharmakaya has all the qualities of 
enlightenment already present as a foundation, all qualities are 
completely perfect already, but no one can perceive them because 
there is no form. The further perfection of all happiness or bliss, the 
sambhogakaya, manifests out of the dharmakaya, but ordinary people 
don't perceive it either. So there is a further manifestation, an actual 
emanated body that anybody can perceive. In the word nirmanakaya 
the term "kaya" is to be understood as "body or form." So coming 
FRUITION MAHAMUDRA 117 
from the dharmakaya, the nirmanakaya is perceived at the impure 
level, manifesting as the foundation for bewilderment. The energy 
or force of the nirmanakaya manifests on an impure level, actually as 
confused (i.e. not true) appearances. All the appearances that ordinary 
beings perceive are perceived in a confused or ignorant way. The 
pure aspect of the nirmanakaya is the Buddha activity that is 
constantly taking place for all sentient beings. 
241. Encompassing all things, 
242. The nature of Mahamudra is coincidence. 30 
So this nature ofMahamudra pervades all objects. It is completely 
all-pervasive, all-encompassing, and all-embracing. 
243. The realm of dharmas free from accepting or rejecting. 
244. Possessing the beauty of unconditioned bliss, 
The dharmadhatu is completely free of anything to give up or 
anything to reject, so there is nothing added or gained in the 
dharmadhatu, this nature of Mahamudra. Also its nature is bliss. 
This is not the kind of happiness that we sometimes feel and 
sometimes don't; this bliss can't change or disappear. It is said to be 
pure or completely stainless happiness. It is like a young beautiful 
body which is in its beauty is completely at peace, not just a happiness 
that comes and goes. 
245. It is the great and vast wealth of wisdom. 
246. It is the natural form of kindness transcending thought. 
Not only is it great bliss, but there is an aspect of understanding. 
It is the complete manifestation of the two wisdoms; the knowledge of 
118 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
absolute phenomena and the knowledge of relative phenomena. 
Having these two knowledges causes a great expanse of wisdom and 
also it is the very manifestation of compassion. In the mind of great 
compassion, the Buddha activity is unimaginable and unfathomable, 
and manifests wherever needed. 
247. Becauu of wisdom, one does not stay in samsara 
248. Because of compassion, one does not stay in nirvana 
249. Activities are spontaneously accomplished without effort. 
From this realization of dharmata, two great qualities arise: prajna 
and compassion. Since one has understood the nature of phenomena, 
there is no dwelling in the state of samsara and one will be naturally 
liberated from it. Arising out of this wisdom is also great compassion. 
Being in the state of bliss and peace for oneself is not sufficient. 
There is this automatic, spontaneous compassion arising for all 
beings. Because of the compassion there is no abiding in nirvana, no 
staying in the state of peace or nirvana. Therefore, not only one's 
own purpose is achieved, but the purpose of all beings. Buddha 
activity which is completely without effort, not deliberate, will 
spontaneously arise. 
250. The luminosities of ground and path, combine like mother 
and child. 
251. Ground and fruition will be joined together 
As this occurs the foundation clear light or luminosity and the 
path luminosity "combine like mother and child." This was described 
previously, exactly the same way. Primordial wisdom was always there 
from the beginning. That foundation luminosity and the luminosity 
which is realized on the path of practice become inseparable. The 
FRUITION MAHAMUDRA 119 
mother and child clear light combine. Based on this experience of 
the uniting of the mother and child luminosities, the foundation 
Mahamudra and the fruition Mahamudra are simultaneously present, 
or realized to be the same thing, not two. 
252. Buddhahood is found in one's own mind. 
253. The treasure that fulfills all wishes is revealed 
254. E ma! What a great wonder! 
Then it is said that the Buddha is found in one's own mind. 
Buddhahood, the realization of Buddha doesn't come from 
anywhere outside, it is not something newly found or invented but 
it is found from within one's own mind. And at that time, all needs 
and desires, anything whatsoever is revealed or brought forth, just 
like opening a treasure. Everything that was ever needed is now 
brought out like opening a great treasure. And where is that treasure? 
It is inside, it is within one's mind and it is found. And this 
phenomena is said to be so amazing. It is so fantastic, awesome. It 
says that through these exceptional teachings and so forth it can be 
realized this way. That is the ending of the discussion of the 
foundation, path, and fruition Mahamudra. 
Now at the very end Jamgon Kongtrul repeats in a very brief 
way, going through the whole thing, this time dividing it into four, 
first the view, then the meditation, then the action and then fruition. 
255. Regarding the view of Mahamudra 
256. Analysis cannot define it. 
257. Therefore, throw knowledge of mental constructions away! 
The Mahamudra view, cannot be reached through inference or 
conclusion or investigation or any kind of intellectual process. 
120 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
Normally, view is something that we investigate. We come up with a 
theory through logical thinking, a logical process. But in the case of 
Mahamudra this doesn't work. There is no way to say this is it, this is 
the view that you are supposed to have, and this is Mahamudra. Any 
kind of investigation or theoretical kind oflogical thinking does not 
apply, it does not work at all. So it advises you to completely throw 
out any kind of theories, any kind of logic, to throw them far away. 
The view ofMahamudra has to be pointed out in our mind, it must 
be realized immediately in dependence upon the blessings and the 
powers of the lineage. Milarepa advised Gampopa in this way, that 
in the practice of Mahamudra, there is nothing theoretical that is 
going to help, that is going to arrive there, that the only thing is the 
direct experience of it. And that actually, if you apply theories and 
concepts to it there is a chance of it going astray and being completely 
the wrong kind of experience. 
258. Regarding the meditation of Mahamudra 
259. Concentration on a thought cannot get through 
260. Therefore abandon artificial resting in meditative equipoise. 
In the meditation ofMahamudra there is no particular experience 
that you have to try and cultivate, thinking, clinging, or fixating to 
some desire to have a certain kind of meditation, thinking, "This is 
what proper meditation ofMahamudra is." And "This is not a good 
meditation or experience coming from Mahamudra meditation." Not 
thinking in this way and not fixating on the experiences of bliss and 
non-thought and clarity as being something, thinking, "This clarity, 
I need to have this experience. I need to have this experience of non­
thought. I need to have this experience of emptiness" and so forth. 
That is why the term "ordinary mind" is used, because there is no 
kind of fabrication or contrivance at all, or clinging to what kind of 
FRUITION MAHAMUDRA 121 
experience this meditation should be. So it says to totally throw that 
whole idea out and just rest in whatever arises in the mind. 
261. Regarding the action ofMahamudra 
262. Rules do not apply. 
263. Therefore free yourself from notions of acting and not acting. 
In the behavior or action of Mahamudra, there is no 
deliberateness and thinking, "I should do this particular thing. I 
should behave in this way. I shouldn't behave in this way," or thinking, 
"Now I have been doing Mahamudra practice I have to act and b<.·have 
in a certain way." There is no deliberateness, no kind of frame nf 
reference at all to one's activities, they are completely free from any 
thoughts of actions or non-actions, activity or non-activity. 
264. Regarding the fruition of Mahamudra 
265. Nothing new can be attained. 
266. Therefore cast away hoping, fearing, and desiring. 
For the fruition Mahamudra, there is no attaining of anything 
new, except that you arrive at where you already were, you arrive at 
the state which you already had or already existed. Nothing 
whatsoever is new, nothing is different than it was, except arriving 
back at where you started. So there are no ideas and one should 
completely give up any hopes that there is going to be some fantastic 
fruition of Mahamudra and it is going to be so wonderful and 
incredible and some kind of big reward. And there should be no fear 
of not obtaining this reward. Those desires of hopes and fears need 
to be thrown far away. 
267. This is the profound intention of all Kagyupas. 
122 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
268. It is the only path used by all the Buddhas and bodhisattvas. 
So these are the qualities all the Kagyu lamas have attained. It is 
the Mahamudra that they have practiced and the result ofMahamudra 
they have attained. The instructions they have given to their disciples 
were the Mahamudra instructions. So Mahamudra can be said to be 
the very essence of their thoughts or intentions. Also it is the way, it 
is the path which all Buddhas and all the Buddhas' children, all 
bodhisattvas, all siddhas and so forth have traveled. They have 
achieved enlightenment in this very way, in this one way. So it is the 
single path traveled by all the Victors and their sons. 
269. It is the method to turn away the confused circle of existence 
270. It is dharma for obtaining Buddhahood in one lifetime, 
271. The heart essence of the sutra and tantra teachings. 
It is also the method or means to turn back, or to reverse all the 
confusion of samsara, of existence. The whole of samsaric existence 
is transcended through this method of Mahamudra. And it is also 
the method of obtaining Buddhahood in a single lifetime. It is like 
the very heart essence of all the teachings, all the dharma that comes 
from the Buddha, both the sutras and all the tantras. 
271. May I and all sentient beings reaching as for as space 
272. Simultaneously attain realization and be liberated. 
273. May we reach the supreme Mahamudra state. 
Then finally the song ends in a supplication or prayer, that I 
myself and all beings throughout space may be liberated through 
realizing Mahamudra, altogether, all at the same time, and thereby 
obtain the excellent state of Mahamudra. 
FRUITION MAHAMUDRA 123 
This text was composed by Yonten Gyatso Lodro Thaye, the subject of 
Padma, so as not to act against the seal of the all-encompassing speech of 
Him, who is Prajnaparamita herself, emptiness endowed with all excellent 
qualities, who appeared as a ~jra Holder. The place was Kunzang 
Dechen Osal Ling on the left slope of the third Devikoti, the Precious 
Tsan-like Rock. SHUBHAM 
This essence of the Prajnaparamita was taught by "the Vajra 
Holder which is to be understood as Jamgon Kongtrul's root lama 
Perna Nyingche Wangpo. Since it is so completely profound and 
vast in its scope, in order for it not to be lost, Jamgon Kongtrul 
Lodro Thaye, or Yonten Gyatso, has written it down in this song. 
The place where he wrote this down is the "tsa dra rinchen dra" 
in the place called Devikoti. And he says the third Devikoti here 
because another name for it is Tsari. In the instructions in the tantra 
of Chakrasamvara are mentioned the twenty-four special places or 
power places. And of the twenty-four power places there are eight 
connected with body, eight connected with speech and eight 
connected with mind. One of the ones that are connected with mind, 
one of these sacred places is this place in India called Tsari, which is 
the first. There is also another place in the southern part ofTibet 
called Tsari, and then there is Jamgon Kongtrul's home here, which 
he also calls Tsari or Devikoti. That is why it is called the third 
Devikoti here. In the name tsa dra rinchen dra, which is the second 
part of the name here, the dra means "like," so tsa dra means "like 
tsa." So he is talking about that it is like Tsari which is the original 
name of this place. 
Then it is mentioned, as part of this name also, that it is a precious 
rock which is like Tsari, which is literally the name. The rock where 
Jamgon Kongtrul stayed was in the shape ofVajrakilaya. When the 
famous terton Chokgyur l.ingpa went there to that place he 
124 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
recognized it. There was a prophecy of Guru Rinpoche of there being 
three termas that would exist. The first ofVajrasattva, then ofYangdag 
and then of Dorje Phurba, associated with the three places, the three 
points of forehead, throat and heart. Then when Chokgyur Lingpa 
was there at Jamgon Kongtrul's place, seeing this rock structure, he 
actually found these three treasures, these three termas, in the places 
corresponding to the forehead, throat and heart of this rock structure. 
Then in this special place which has these qualities he had a 
retreat house to the left of it. This was called Dechen Osal Ling and 
is where he wrote this song. SHUBHAM at the end there means 
tashi, may everything be good, auspicious. 
Questions 
Question: Would you please explain again how bewilderment arises 
from the sambhogakaya? 
Rinpoche: It is not that you think that it is arising from sambhogakaya. 
But this basic nature has this radiance, almost character kind of thing, 
which becomes clearer and clearer because it is unimpeded, it is 
unimpedable, unobstructable. So it manifests as further and further 
clarity or luminosity, which eventually is the appearance of everything, 
all objects and all objective reality, getting more and more clear. That 
whole process which describes it more or less from the original state 
through the whole process or development of more and more 
vividness or clarity taking place is the impure aspect description. If 
you describe that same thing taking place through the pure aspect 
or, with realization, then that first unobstructedness of that radiance, 
where its nature is clarity or luminosity, that part is called 
sambhogakaya. Then when it is further manifested to actual 
appearances, that part is called nirmanakaya. On the one side you 
FRUITION MAHAMUDRA 125 
could call them bewilderment and on the other side sambhogakaya 
and nirmanakaya. 
Question: So it seems that the difference whether it goes in increasing 
clarity and appearance is whether the emptiness aspect is present at 
the same time or not. 
Rinpoche: Yes exactly. If one keeps in mind the realization of 
emptiness, then the first unimpeded aspect of the radiance is 
sambhogakaya and the further manifestation is the power and ability 
or strength of its manifestation is nirmanakaya. When there is no 
realization of emptiness then it seems like the progressive development 
of the clarity into final appearance, bewildered appearance. 
Question: Could you say something more about what it means that 
all qualities are present in the dharmakaya? 
Rinpoche: This means that it has all qualities or is the foundation or 
basis of all qualities. It has the ability; there exists the capability of 
eliminating all that which is to be eliminated, all the bewilderment, 
all the ignorance, all the bewildered appearances of our normal 
experience. This whole thing which was described with the clarity 
being more and more vivid and final, the appearances and the whole 
duality appearing, is something which is to be cleared up or 
eliminated. That bewilderment is to be eliminated. It is something 
to be eliminated. When it is eliminated then we say it is through the 
actualization of the emptiness of the dharmakaya and, through the 
wisdom and quality of the understanding of the clarity aspect of this 
potential, the fact of it having all this potential as clarity. Because it 
has those two aspects or, one realizes those two aspects, it is said to 
be the foundation of qualities. 
Question: So the qualities are not the dharmakaya itself? 
126 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
Rinpoche: The dharmakaya itself is not the qualities, it 1s the 
foundation or basis from which the qualities arise. 
Question: The book the Clear Light of Bliss lists a Mahamudra lineage 
which didn't have any names I recognized. It was a text on the 
completion stage of Mahamudra. I wondered whether this was the 
same discipline as the Kagyus? 
Rinpoche: Essentially the book discusses Mahamudra using the same 
terms as we have, but it is from a different lineage (Gelugpa). It 
comes through a different lineage and I think that our lineage, the 
Kagyu lineage, is a little more profound. Why? Because our lineage 
holders actually practiced and gained direct realization of 
Mahamudra, their understanding arose from actual experience. The 
other lineage has kept the meaning of the words very well and passed 
on an intellectual level, but it has not always been based on experience 
of the meditation. 
The Six Realms of Samsara 
Name 
God 
(Skt. deva) 
Demi-god 
(Skt. asura) & pictured in thangkas 
HIGHER REALMS 
The celestial paradises are 
shown 
Demi-gods are involved 
in conflict with the gods. Obstacle 
Pride 
Jealousy 
REALM EASIEST TO ATTAIN ENLIGHTENMENT 
Human realm 
Animal realm 
Hungry ghost 
(Skt. preta) 
Hell beings Human beings in their houses The five 
practicing the dharma disturbing 
emotions 
LOWER REALMS 
Animals on earth Ignorance 
Beings with large bellies and Desire 
very small mouths and necks 
Beings being tortured in hot Anger 
and cold realms 
The Five Paths 
1. Path of Accumulation 
2. Path of Application 
3. Path oflnsight/seeing 
4. Path of Cultivation 
(Meditation) Practice four mindfulnesses, 
recognize the four marks of 
existence (impermanence, absence 
of a self, suffering and peace). 
Practice four renunciations 
Practice four concentrative absorptions 
(strong interest, perserverance, 
attentiveness, and investigation) 
Practice five controlling powers 
(confidence, sustained effort, 
mindfulness, samadhi, and prajna). 
These powers become "unshakable" at 
the end of this path. 
Attain the first bodhisattva level of 
perceiving emptiness. 
Develop true awareness of the Four 
Noble Truths and their 16 aspects. 
Develop seven factors of enlightenment 
(memory, investigation of meaning and 
values, effort, joy, refinement and 
serenity, samadhi, and equanimity). 
One goes through the 2nd to 1Oth 
bodhisattva levels. 
One practices the eight-fold Noble Path 
(right view, right intention, right speech, 
right action, right livelihood, right 
effort, right mindfulness, and right 
meditation). 
5. Path of No More Learning This is Buddhahood. 
The Bodhisattva Levels 
1. The Joyous One Emphasis on generosity 
2. The Stainless One Emphasis on discipline 
3. The Illuminating One Emphasis on patience 
4. The Flaming One Emphasis on exertion 
5. The One Difficult to Conquer Emphasis on meditation 
6. The Manifest One Emphasis on wisdom 
7. The Far Going one Emphasis on skillful activity 
8. The Unshakable One Emphasis on future projection 
9. The One of Good Discrimination Emphasis on efficacy 
10. Cloud of Dharma Attaining enlightened wisdom 
Transformation of Conciousncss into Wisdom 
ORGAN CoNSCIOUSNESS WISDOM KAY AS 
Eye l.Eye consciousness 
Ear 2. Ear consciousness 
Nose 3. Nose consciousness All-accomplishing wisdom Nirmanakaya 
Tongue 4. Tongue consciousness 
Body 5. Body consciousnes 
6A. Non-conceptual mind consciousness 
6B. Conceptual mind consciousness Dharmadhatu wisdom Svabhavikakaya 
Mind 7 A. Immediate mind consciousness Discriminating wisdom 
Sambhogakaya 
7B. Afflicted mind consciousness Wisdom of equality 
8. Alaya consciousness Mirror-like wisdom Dharmakaya 
Notes 
1. This refers to the Five Treasuries composed by Jamgon Kongtrul Lodro 
Thaye. These are: 1. The Treasury ofVast Teachings (Gyachen Kardzo) 
which is the actual collected writings of Jamgon Kongtrul, works he 
himself composed. 2. The Treasury of Knowledge (Sheja Dzo) is like a 
collection of his writings on all fields of knowledge, 3. The Treasury of 
Hidden Treasure Teachings (Rinchen Terzod), 4. The Treasury of Kagyu 
Mantra Teachings (Kagyu Ngakzod), and 5. The Treasury of Spiritual 
Instructions (Dam Ngakzod) are more like collections that he compiled. 
2. The conditions for becoming a biological being are the ovum from your 
mother and the sperm from your father, which when mixed with 
consciousness forms that life and leads to the development of the fetus. 
The seed essence of the ovum is the red element and while you are alive 
it is in the centre of your body below your navel. The seed essence of 
your father's sperm is the white element, and it is present in the centre 
of your body at the top of your head. -Khenpo Karthar Rinpoche 
3. This does not mean we should distort or deny our perception, but we 
should emphasize the good qualities and let faults be without being 
disturbed by them. This way we benefit most from whatever good a 
teacher has to offer. -Cornelia Weishaar 
4. Gampopa was the founder of the monastic order of the Kagyu School and 
the lineages that branch out from him are known as the Dakpo Kagyu. 
5. In Tibetan medicine and yoga there are subtle channels, like meridians in 
acupuncture, through which subtle energies (Skt. prana) flow. 
6. These six consist of the subtle heat practice, the illusory body practice, 
the dream yoga practice, the luminosity practice, the ejection of 
consciousness practice and the bardo practice. 
7. From Gampopa's disciple Phagmo Drupa, the Phagmo Kagyu; from Baram 
Dharma Wangchuk, the Baram Kagyu; from Dusum Khyenpa, (the 
132 TilE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODROTHAYE 
first Gyalwang Karmapa), the Kamtsang Kagyu, and; Ghampo Tsultrim 
Nyingpo's disciple Tsondru Trakpa, the Tshalpa Kagyu. These four are 
known as the four greater or senior schools. 
Phagmo Drupa had eight main disciples who founded eight 
additional lineages: 1. The Drikhung Kagyu was founded by Drikhung 
Kyopa Jigten Sumgyi Gonpo. 2. The Drukpa Kagyu was founded by 
Drupchen Lingrepa Perna Dorje and his disciple Choje Tsangpa Gyare 
Yeshe Dorje. 3. The Taklung Kagyu was founded by Taklung Thangpa 
Tashi Pal. 4. The Yasang Kagyu was founded by Zarawa Kalden Yeshe 
Senge and his disciple Yasang Choje Chokyi Monlam. 5. The Trophu 
Kagyu was founded by Rinpoche Gyatsa, and his disciple Trophu 
Lotsawa Champa Pal. 6. The Shuksep Kagyu was founded by Gyergom 
Tsultrim Senge. 7. Yelpa Kagyu was founded by Yelpa Drupthop Yeshe 
Tsekpa. 8. Martsang Kagyu was founded by Martsang Sherab Senge 
8. In fact, garudas are said to be fully developed when they are born. 
9. It may be helpful here to understand that the term "consciousness," which 
in Sanskrit is vijana, (Tib. namshe) refers to a specific type of cognition. 
It is the term for "cognition," jana, (Tib. yeshe) with the prefix vi, which 
means complete or fully developed. It is a more specific term than 
cognition and although it may sound like a positive thing to say "fully­
developed cognition," in this context it is actually somewhat pejorative 
because it refers to cognition that has become developed in the sense of 
becoming coarsened. This is the type of cognition-or consciousness­
that we as ordinary individuals have and it is divided into the eight or 
six types of consciousnesses. All of these consciousnesses are considered 
manifestations of the mind's impurity. They are things that arise when 
a mind does not recognize its own nature. The basic idea of the 
development of consciousness is that when a mind does not recognize 
its own nature, its inherent lucidity that is just a mere cognition or bare 
awareness, it runs wild. In running wild it becomes coarse or develops 
into deluded cognition or consciousness, which is a characteristic of 
samsara. Nevertheless, in the midst of the confused nature of these 
consciousnesses, the nature of this deluded mind is unchanged. 
NOTES 133 
I 0. Some Buddhist schools such as those of the Theravada schools hold that 
there are six consciousnesses with there being five sensory consciousnesses 
{visual, auditory, olfactory, gustatory, tactile) and mental consciousness 
which comprises the functions of the seventh and eighth consciousness. 
Other Buddhist schools such as the Mind-only school, for example, 
hold that there are the five sensory consciousnesses, a mental 
consciousness, and then a separate seventh afflicted consciousness, and 
a separate eighth alaya consciousness. 
The five sensory consciousnesses perceive sensory input directly 
without doing any evaluation. The sixth mental consciousness which is 
what we call our "mind" it does all kinds of integration and evaluation 
of the sensory consciousnesses. The seventh afflicted consciousness is 
the every-present belief in an "I." The first seven consciousnesses are 
held together by the eighth foundation or alaya consciousness which 
also functions to store the imprints of everything happening in the 
sixth consciousness. 
11. In Thrangu Rinpoche's Transcending Ego he describes this eighth 
consciousness in much more detail and two aspects of it. First, the eighth 
consciousness holds all the other consciousnesses together so one has 
the feeling that one is a single unitary being which gradually changes in 
time. Second, it is also the "store-house" consciousness in which all the 
karmic seeds are stored so when one sees an airplane, for example, one 
remembers that this is an airplane. These karmic seeds or latencies (Tib. 
bakchag) also carry one's karma of positive and negative actions which 
continues on from one lifetime to the next. 
12. What happens is that all of the bakchag, "habitual tendencies or habits 
or ways of perceiving" are stored in the alaya or storehouse consciousness, 
the kun zhi namshe; then when certain conditions come together, we 
get the projections of all of these appearances that are the result of our 
having stored our previous habits in this storehouse consciousness. We 
think that these projections from our own consciousness are real, when 
in fact they're not, they're just confused appearances. The storehouse 
consciousness is called by two different names to illustrate the two 
134 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
functions that it performs. The first is called "the holding consciousness" 
because it holds all of the habitual tendencies, the imprints from our 
previous ways of perceiving. The second is called the conditioned 
consciousness because when certain conditions come together, then 
certain habits wake up and emit certain projections of appearances. In 
this way, you can think of the storehouse consciousness as being like a 
tape recorder. When it's on record, then it's storing all of the information, 
all of the sounds, etc.; then when you put it on play, it sends them out. 
In terms of the way that confusion arises, it's explained that the 
egoistic mind (the seventh consciousness) is like wind and the storehouse 
consciousness is like the ocean. So the wind of the egoistic mind blows 
on this ocean of the storehouse consciousness and causes these waves to 
come up out of it and those waves are the dualistic appearances that we 
think to be real. -Khenpo Tsultrim Gyatso Rinpoche 
13. This is the translation of the Tibetan word salwa which is also translated 
variously as "brilliance," "luminous clarity," and "luminosity." We 
must not make the mistake of thinking of this as some kind of light 
such as we get from a light bulb even though the words suggest this. 
Rather it is simply that continuous awareness, that knowing, that the 
mind always has. 
14. We understand that the alaya or kun zhi does not lead to bewilderment, 
rather the habitual patterns do. When we recognize the ultimate state 
of the kun zhi, the ground consciousness, which is free of habitual 
patterns, we have realized wisdom. When it is free of all habitual patterns, 
it is no longer the kun zhi consciousness but the kun zhi wisdom, the 
jnana-alaya. 
15. The union or inseparability of luminosity and emptiness refers to the 
fact that mind is empty, yet at the same time it is knowing, aware and so 
it also has luminosity. The emptiness could not exist without the 
luminosity and the luminosity could not exist without the emptiness. 
16. For these nine examples see Thrangu Rinpoche's The Uttaratantra: A 
Treatise on Buddha-Essence. Namo Buddha and ZCG Publications. 
17. When we say the co-emergence of ignorance and the eighth 
NOTES 135 
consciousness, we mean that this misunderstanding of not knowing 
that external phenomena are empty and not "solid and real" arises and 
reinforces the eighth consciousness. 
18. In this analogy the many thoughts and emotions and false beliefs such 
as "there is a real self" are compared to the waves on an ocean with the 
waves appearing very real, but they just come and go and don't have 
any real lasting substance. The true nature of mind or its essence is not 
thoughts and emotions, but a deep calm abiding which lasts forever 
just like the ocean itself. 
19. The word "affiictive" is an English translation for the Sanskrit klesha 
and mon nong in Tibetan which are the negative disturbing emotions of 
anger, attachment and ignorance. The point being that even though 
the seventh consciousness has a negative connotation, it is not negative 
as long as there is no attachment to self. 
20. Bewildered in this context refers to an incorrect perception. In other 
words, the true nature of self is that it is "empty" that is, that it is not a 
solid single entity, yet when we think of ourselves, it is as a solid, real 
thing. This is what is meant here by confusion or bewilderment or in 
Tibetan ma rigpa. 
21. There are two levels of reality or two truths as they are often called 
kunzop (relative truth) and dondam (ultimate truth). Kunzop refers to 
the world as perceived by ordinary (unenlightened) beings and this 
reality is an illusion or fake in that we believe that objects are solid 
and enduring. We call this conventional reality because this is what 
most people perceive and believe in. However, a person who is 
enlightened will see that the world is actually empty of inherent nature 
and therefore see the world as it really is. This is referred to then as 
absolute truth or ultimate truth. 
One Western example is that if we have a cup, it looks white and 
solid and made out of material we call china. This is the conventional 
level. Yet scientists would tell us that this "cup" is really a collection of 
different elements and the atoms of these elements are moving at 
incredible speeds and the "white" we and all other humans see is really 
136 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
just a particular wavelength oflight. This would be more like the ultimate 
level of reality. 
22. Fully enlightened beings, Buddhas, and their manifestations are often 
understood by way of the three kayas: the dharmakaya is enlightenment 
itself, wisdom beyond any reference point which can only be perceived 
by other enlightened beings; the sambhogakaya, often called the 
enjoyment body, manifests in the pure lands, which can only be seen 
by advanced bodhisattvas; and the nirmanakaya, which can be seen by 
ordinary beings as in the case of the historical Buddha, who was a 
supreme nirmanakaya, meaning that he displayed all the physical signs 
and marks of perfection, but nirmanakaya can also be any type of being 
or relative appearance to assist ordinary beings. 
23. The failure of the mind to recognize its own true nature is what is meant 
by the term ma rigpa, or ignorance, the first level of obscuration or 
defilement in the mind. As a result of this ignorance, there arises in the 
mind the imputation of an 'T' and an "other" (the other being something 
that is conceived as something that is other than the mind). This dualistic 
clinging, something that we have had throughout beginningless time 
and that never stops (until enlightenment), is the second level of 
obscuration, the obscuration of habits (habitual tendency). 
Based upon this dualistic clinging arise the three root mental afflictions: 
mental darkness (variously rendered by translators as ignorance, 
bewilderment, confusion, etc.), desire and aggression. Based upon these 
three afflictions there arise some 84,000 various mental afflictions 
enumerated by the Buddha, all of which together comprise the third 
level of obscuration, called the obscuration of mental afflictions 
(variously rendered as klesha, emotional affliction, disturbing emotions, 
etc). Under the influence of these, we perform actions that are obscured 
in their nature, which result in the fourth level of obscuration, called 
the obscuration of actions or karma. This is the process that keeps us in 
samsara. -Khabje Kalu Rinpoche 
24. It was said by Tilopa, "Child, it is not by appearances that you are 
fettered, but by craving. Therefore Naropa, relinquish or cut through 
NOTES 137 
craving." The distinction needs to be made between appearances and our 
craving for or grasping at them. Appearances themselves are not a problem. 
Grasping or craving is problematic. -Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche 
25. "Ordinary" mind does not denote common mind that everyone has 
which is full of thoughts, desires, etc., but rather the original mind 
which is free of all disturbing emotions and incorrect wisdom. 
There is no need to do anything to your present wakefulness at the 
moment of recognizing; it is already as it is. That is the true meaning of 
naked ordinary mind, a famous term in Tibetan. It means not tampered 
with. There is no "thing" which needs to be accepted or rejected; it is 
simply as it is. The term 'ordinary mind' is the most immediate and 
accurate term to describe the nature of mind. No matter what 
terminology is being utilized within the Middle-way, Mahamudra or 
Dzogchen, naked ordinary mind is the simplest term. 
26. The desire realm comprises the six realms of gods, demi-gods, humans, 
animals, hungry spirits and hell-beings. The form realm comprises 
eighteen classes of god of subtle form. The formless realm comprises 
four classes of gods. 
27. One taste and co-emergent wisdom are generally the same, but they are 
used in a different way. Co-emergent wisdom is used in discussing the 
very essence of the nature, the foundation of one's realization being the 
true nature. Whereas one flavor is talking about the gradual experience, 
the enhancing of our experience through the different levels and at one 
point we experience it as one flavor. -Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche 
28. There are two categories of obscurations or defilements that cover one's 
Buddha-essence: the emotional affiictions or obscuration of the disturbing 
emotions (the three root affiictions are ignorance, desire and aggression), 
and the more subtle obscurations known variously as the defilement of 
latent tendencies, the obscuration of dualistic perception, intellectual 
obscurations, or the cognitive obscurations (seeing the world from the 
perspective of a "self" and what is "other"). The first category prevents 
sentient beings from freeing themselves from samsara, while the second 
prevents them from gaining accurate knowledge and realizing truth. 
138 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
29. There is a correspondence between these four stages of Mahamudra 
(one-pointedness, simplicity, one-flavor and non-meditation) and the 
five paths of accumulation, application, seeing, meditation and no-more­
learning. The first level of one-pointedness refers mainly to one-pointed 
tranquility (Shamatha) meditation. The lesser and middling levels of 
one-pointedness would be more or less associated with the path of 
accumulation. The greater level of one-pointedness would be more 
associated with the path of application because one is joined to the true 
meaning. The second Mahamudra stage of freedom from concept 
(simplicity) is associated with the path of seeing. The stage of beyond 
concept means that first of all we have developed the power ofShamatha, 
and then through that tranquility meditation we develop Vipashyana. 
Because of the insight ofVipashyana, we realize the true nature, which 
corresponds to the path of seeing. 
The third Mahamudra stage of one-flavor corresponds to the path 
of cultivation or meditation, and the fourth Mahamudra stage of non­
meditation corresponds to the fifth path of no-more-learning. The one­
flavor stage corresponds to the second to the seventh bodhisattva levels. 
The eighth bodhisattva level corresponds to the lesser aspect of non­
meditation. The ninth and the tenth bodhisattva levels correspond to 
the middling aspect of beyond meditation level. Then the state of 
Buddhahood would be the highest of the twelve sub-sections, the highest 
point of the non-meditation level. 
When we reach the twelfth stage, the highest stage of non­
meditation through Mahamudra practice, then the qualities of mind 
that we achieve are the same as those of Buddhahood, those achieved 
through the classic, long Mahayana path. But the speech and the physical 
qualities are not quite the same. This is because when we traverse the 
ordinary Mahayana path, then for many endless kalpas we are taking 
birth again and again and generating virtue. This is an extremely 
powerful thing, even though it is a much longer process. In that long 
process we accumulate such vast virtue that this will lead, at the end of 
the ordinary Mahayana path, to the tremendous physical and speech 
NOTES 139 
qualities that we associate with the thirty-two and eighty marks of the 
Buddha. When we go through the very profound and rapid path of 
Mahayana, we won't necessarily get those. If we look at the life ofJetsun 
Milarepa or the life of Gampopa, they didn't manifest the thirty-two 
signs and the eighty marks like the Shakyamuni Buddha did. This is 
because, for instance with Milarepa, he was born into an ordinary body 
and quickly perfected the Mahamudra. So the mind quality of realization 
is exactly the same, but the body and speech qualities that manifest for 
others are not the same. -Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche 
30. The Tibetan is zung Jug which is often translated as unity. But as the 
Tibetan term clearly implies the coming together of two factors such as 
emptiness and luminosity, coincidence is more precise. -Cornelia 
Weishaar 

Glossary of Terms 
Afflicted consciousness. The seventh consciousness. As used here it has two 
aspects: the immediate consciousness which monitors the other 
consciousnesses, making them continuous, and the klesha consciousness 
which is the continuous presence of self. (See consciousnesses, eight) 
Afflictive obscuration. There are two types of obscurations that cover one's 
Buddha nature. The obscuration of the affiictive or disturbing emotions 
and the obscuration of dualistic perception, or sometimes called the 
intellectual obscurations or cognitive obscurations. 
Alaya consciousness. (Tib. kunzhi namshe) According to the Chittamatra school 
this is the eighth consciousness and is often called the ground 
consciousness or storehouse consciousness. 
Atman. Sanskrit for a permanent "self" which exists. 
Bhumi. Level or stage. There are ten bodhisattva levels which begin with the 
path of seeing in the surra tradition. The tantric tradition has thineen levels. 
Blessings. (Tib. chin lap) Splendor wave, conveying the sense of atmosphere 
descending or coming toward the practitioner. One's root guru and 
lineage are said to be the source of blessings. When the student can 
open themselves with uncontrived devotion, the grace of the lineage 
manifests as blessings, which dissolve into them and awaken them to a 
sense of greater reality. 
Bodhichitta. Literally, the mind of enlightenment. There are two kinds of 
bodhichitta: absolute bodhichitta, which is completely awakened mind 
that sees the emptiness of all phenomena, and relative bodhichitta which 
is the aspiration to practice the six paramitas and free all beings from 
the suffering of sam sara. In regard to relative bodhichitta, there are also 
two kinds: aspiration bodhichitta and perseverance bodhichitta. 
Bodhisattva. "Heroic mind." Bodhi means blossomed or enlightened, and 
sattva means heroic mind. Literally, one who exhibits the mind of 
142 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
enlightenment. Also an individual who has committed him or herself 
to the Mahayana path of compassion and the practice of the six paramitas 
to achieve Buddhahood to free all beings from samsara. These are the 
heart or mind disciples of the Buddha. 
Bodhisattva levels. (Skt. bhumz) The levels or stages a bodhisatrva goes through 
to reach enlightenment. These consist of ten levels in the surra tradition 
and thirteen in the tantra tradition. The ten are: 1. Overwhelming Joy, 
2. Stainless, 3. Radiant, 4. Luminous, 5. Difficult to Practice, 6. 
Obviously Transcendent , 7. Far Gone, 8. Unshakeable, 9. Excellent 
Discriminating Wisdom, 10. Cloud of Dharma. 
Buddha nature. (Tib. de shegs nying po) The essential nature of all sentient 
beings; the potential for enlightenment. 
Chakrasamvara. A meditational deity which belongs to the Anuttarayoga 
tantra set of teachings. A main yidam or tantra of the New Schools. 
Channels, winds and essences. Nadi, prana and bindu; the constituents of 
the vajra body. These channels are not anatomical structures, but more 
like meridians in acupuncture. There are thousands of channels, but 
the three main channels that carry the subtle energy are the right, left 
and central channel. The central channel runs roughly along the spinal 
column while the right and left are on the sides of the central channel. 
According to the yogic teachings of the path of skillful means, 
realization is attained through synchronization ofbody and mind. This 
may be achieved through meditating on nadi (channels), prana {energy), 
and bindu (drops)- the psychic components in the illusory body. Prana 
is the energy, or "wind," moving through the nadis. As is said, "Mind 
consciousness rides the horse of prana on the pathways of the nadis. 
The bindu is mind's nourishment." 
Because of dualistic thinking, prana enters the left and right 
channels. This divergence of energy in the illusory body corresponds to 
the mental activiry that falsely distinguishes between subject and object 
and leads to karmically determined activiry. Through yogic practice, 
the pranas can be brought into the central channel and therefore 
transformed into wisdom-prana. Then the mind can recognize its 
fundamental nature, realizing all dharmas as unborn. 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS 143 
This belongs to advanced practice and can only be learned through 
direct oral transmission from an accomplished guru. Once the meditator 
is well established in the experience of the fundamental nature of mind, 
they can meditate on it directly, dissolving the nadi, prana, and hindu 
visualization. Meditation using the concept of psychic channels is 
regarded as being the completion stage with signs, and the formless 
practice which contemplates the nature of mind directly is the 
completion stage without signs. 
Chittamatra school. A school founded by Asanga in the fourth century, usually 
translated as the Mind-only school. It is one of the four major schools 
in the Mahayana tradition (the others being the two Rangtong -
Svatantrika and Prasangika -and Shentong) and its main tenet (to 
greatly simplify) is that all phenomena are mental events. 
Clarity. (Tib. salwa) Also translated as luminosity. The nature of mind is 
that it is empty of inherent existence, but the mind is not just voidness 
or completely empty because it has this clarity which is awareness or 
the knowing of mind. So clarity is a characteristic of emptiness (shunyata) 
of mind. 
Co-emergent wisdom. (Skt. sahajajnana, Tib. /hen chik kye pay yeshe) The 
advanced realization of the inseparability of samsara and nirvana and 
how these arise simultaneously and together. 
Cognitive obscurations. There are two types of obscuration that cover one's 
Buddha nature; the obscuration of the afflictive or disturbing emotions 
and the obscuration of dualistic perception, sometimes called the 
intellectual obscurations or cognitive obscurations. The cognitive 
obscuration is the subtle obscuration of holding on to the concepts of 
subject, object and action. 
Completion stage. In the Vajrayana there are two stages of meditation: the 
creation/development stage and the completion stage. Completion 
stage with marks is the six doctrines. Completion stage without marks 
is the practice of essence Mahamudra, resting in the unfabricated 
nature of mind. 
Conditioned (cyclic) existence. (Skt. samsara) Ordinary existence which 
144 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
contains suffering because one still possesses attachment, aggression, 
and ignorance. It is contrasted to liberation or nirvana. 
Consciousnesses, sensory. These are the five sensory consciousnesses of sight, 
hearing, smell, taste, touch, and body sensation. 
Consciousnesses, eight. (Skt. vijfiana) These are the five sensory consciousnesses 
of sight, hearing, smell, taste, touch, and body sensation. Sixth is mental 
consciousness, seventh is afflicted consciousness, and eighth is ground 
consciOusness. 
Consciousnesses, six. The five sensory consciousnesses and the mental 
consciOusness. 
Creation stage. (Skt. utpattikrama) In the Vajrayana there are two stages of 
meditation: the development and the completion stage. The creation 
stage is a method of tantric meditation that involves the visualization 
and contemplation of deities for the purpose of purifying habitual 
tendencies and realizing the purity of all phenomena. In this stage 
visualization of the deity is established and maintained. 
Desire realm. Comprises the six realms of gods, demi-gods, humans, animals, 
hungry spirits and hell-beings. 
Dharmadhatu. Dharma is "the truth" and dhatu means, "space free from a 
centre." The all-encompassing space, unoriginated and without beginning, 
out of which all phenomena arises. The Sanskrit means "the essence of 
phenomena'' and the Ttbetan means "the expanse of phenomena," but it 
usually refers to the emptiness that is the essence of phenomena. 
Dharmadhatu and dharmakaya are essentially the same; they are two 
indivisible aspects of the same thing. The dharmakaya emphasizes the 
wisdom aspect while dharmadhatu emphasizes the emptiness aspect. 
Dharmakaya. (Tib. cho ku} One of the three bodies of Buddhahood. It is 
enlightenment itself, that is, wisdom beyond any point of reference. 
(see kayas, three.} 
Dharmata. Dharmata is often translated as "suchness," "the true nature of 
things" or "things as they are." It is phenomena as it really is or as seen 
by a completely enlightened being without any distortion or obscuration, 
so one can say it is "reality." The nature of phenomena and mind. 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS 145 
Dhatu. These are the six sensory objects of sight, sound, smell, taste and 
body sensation; the six sense faculties: the visual sensory faculty, the 
auditory sensory faculty, etc., and the six sensory consciousnesses: the 
visual consciousness, the auditory consciousness, etc. They make up 
the eighteen constituents of perception. 
Doha. A spiritual song spontaneously composed by a Vajrayana practitioner. 
It usually has nine syllables per line. 
Dzogchen. (Skt. mahasandht) Literally "the great perfection." The teachings 
beyond the vehicles of causation, first taught in the human world by 
the great Vidyadhara Garab Dorje. 
Eight Kagyu Lineages. Phagmo Drupa, one of the four greater lineage 
founders, had eight main disciples who founded eight additional 
lineages: 1. The Drikhung Kagyu was founded by Drikhung Kyopa 
Jigten Sumgyi Gonpo. 2. The Drukpa Kagyu was founded by Drupchen 
Lingrepa Perna Dorje and his disciple Choje Tsangpa Gyare Yeshe Dorje. 
3. The Taklung Kagyu was founded by Taklung Thangpa Tashi Pal. 4. 
The Yasang Kagyu was founded by Zarawa Kalden Yeshe Senge and his 
disciple Yasang Choje Chokyi Monlam. 5. The Trophu Kagyu was 
founded by Rinpoche Gyatsa, and his disciple Trophu Lotsawa Champa 
Pal. 6. The Shuksep Kagyu was founded by Gyergom Tsultrim Senge. 
7. Yelpa Kagyu was founded by Yelpa Drupthop Yeshe Tsekpa. 8. 
Martsang Kagyu was founded by Martsang Sherab Senge 
Eight mental constructs or complexities are mental formulations that 
phenomena have such attributes as arising and ceasing, being singular 
or plural, coming and going, and being the same or being different. 
Eight worldly concerns. (Tib. jik ten cho gysh) These keep one from the path; 
they are attachment to gain, attachment to pleasure, attachment to 
praise, attachment to fame, aversion to loss, aversion to pain, aversion 
to blame and aversion to a bad reputation. 
Emptiness. (Tib. tongpa nyi Skt. shunyata) A central theme in Buddhism. It 
should not lead one to views of nihilism or the like, but is a term 
indicating the lack of any truly existing independent nature of any and 
all phenomena. Positively stated, phenomena do exist, but as mere 
146 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
appearances, interdependent manifestations of mind with no limitation. 
It is not that it is just your mind, as mind is also free of any true existence. 
This frees one from a solipsist view. This is interpreted differently by 
the individual schools. 
Empowerment. (Skt. abhisheka) The conferring of power or authorization to 
practice the Vajrayana teachings, the indispensable entrance door to 
tantric practice. To do a Vajrayana practice one must receive the 
empowerment from a qualified lama. One should also receive the 
practice instruction (Tib. trt) and the textual reading (Tib. lung). 
Eternalism. The belief that there is a permanent and causeless creator of 
everything; in particular, that one's identity or consciousness has a 
concrete essence which is independent, everlasting and singular. 
Experience and realization. (Tib. myamtog) An expression used for insight 
and progress on the path. "Experience" refers to temporary meditation 
experiences and "realization" to unchanging understanding of the nature 
of things. 
Five paths. According to the sutras there are five paths: the path of accumulation, 
the path of application, the path of seeing/insight (attainment of the first 
bodhisattva level), the path of meditation and the path of no more learning 
(Buddhahood). The five paths cover the entire process from beginning 
dharma practice to complete enlightenment. 
Five wisdoms. The dharmadhatu wisdom, mirror-like wisdom, wisdom of 
equality, discriminating wisdom and all-accomplishing wisdom. They 
should not be understood as separate but rather as different functions 
of one's enlightened essence. 
Form realm. God realms of subtle form. 
Formless realm. The abode of an unenlightened being who has practiced the 
four absorptions: infinite space, infinite consciousness, nothing 
whatsoever, and neither presence nor absence (of conception). 
Four common foundations. These are the four thoughts that turn the mind 
toward dharma. They are reflection on precious human birth, 
impermanence and the inevitability of death, karma and its effects, 
and the pervasiveness of suffering in samsara. 
GLOSSARY 0 F TERMS 147 
Four empowerments. The empowerments of vase, secret, wisdom-knowledge 
and precious word. 
Four extremes. (Tib. tha shz) Existence, non-existence, both and neither. 
Four joys. (Tib. dga' ba bzhz) These are joy, supreme joy, transcendent joy, 
and co-emergent joy. 
Four Kagyu Lineages. From Gampopa's disciple Phagmo Drupa, the Phagmo 
Kagyu; from Baram Dharma Wangchuk, the Baram Kagyu; from 
Dusum Khyenpa, (the first Gyalwang Karmapa), the Kamtsang Kagyu, 
and; Ghampo Tsultrim Nyingpo's disciple Tsondru Trakpa, the Tshalpa 
Kagyu. These four are known as the four greater or senior schools. 
Four uncommon foundations. (Tib. Ngondro and pronounced "nundro") 
Tibetan for preliminary practice. One usually begins the Vajrayana path 
by doing the four preliminary practices which involve about 100,000 
refuge prayers and prostrations, 100,000 Vajrasattva mantras, 100,000 
mandala offerings, and 1 00,000 guru yoga practices. 
Four Yogas of Mahamudra. Four stages in Mahamudra practice: one­
pointedness, simplicity, one taste and non-meditation. 
Gampopa. ( 1079-1153 C. E.) One of the main lineage holders of the Kagyu 
lineage in Tibet. A student of Milarepa, he established the first Kagyu 
monastic monastery and is known also for writing the jewel Ornament 
of Liberation. 
Garuda. A mythical bird that hatches fully grown. 
Guru. (Tib. lama) A teacher in the Tibetan tradition who has reached 
realization. 
Guru yoga. A practice of devotion to the guru culminating in receiving his 
blessing and blending indivisibly with his mind. Also refers to the fourth 
practice of the preliminary practices of Ngondro. 
Habitual patterns. (Skt. vasana. Tib. bakchak) Patterns of conditional response 
that exist as traces or tendencies stored in the alaya-vijnana, the eighth 
consciousness sometimes called the store-house or all-base consciousness. 
So called because it is a repository of all karmically conditioned patterns. 
All dualistic or ego-oriented experiences leave a residue, which is stored 
in rhe alaya-vijnana until a later time when some conscious occurrence 
148 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
activates the habitual pattern. The pattern then generates a response in 
the form of a perception or an action. This response leaves its own 
karmic residue, stored again in the unconscious repository, and the cycle 
continues. The explanation of this system is a central teaching of the 
Chittamatrin tradition of Mahayana Buddhism. 
Hevajra. This is the "mother tantra" of the Anuttarayoga tamra, which is 
the highest of the four yogas. Hevajra is said to be an exclamation of 
joy. Hevajra transforms sense pleasures into joy through the realization 
of the identity of form and emptiness. Hevajra is depicted in two, four, 
six, twelve, and sixteen-armed forms, dancing in union with his consort, 
usually Nairatmya. 
jamgon Kongtrul Lodro Thaye. A great non-sectarian master of the nineteenth 
century and author of more than one hundred volumes of books. 
jnana. (Tib. yeshe) Enlightened wisdom that is beyond dualistic thought. 
Kagyu. (Tib.) Ka means oral and gyu means lineage; the lineage of oral 
transmission. One of the four major schools of Buddhism in Tibet. It 
was founded in Tibet by Marpa and is headed by His Holiness Karmapa. 
The other three are the Nyingma, the Sakya and the Gelugpa schools. 
Karma Kagyu. (Tib.) One of the eight schools of the Kagyu lineage ofTibetan 
Buddhism which is headed by His Holiness Karmapa. 
Karmapa. The name means Buddha activities. The Karmapas are the head 
of the Kagyu school of Buddhism and were the first to implement the 
tradition of incarnate lamas. Karmapas are thought to be an emanation 
of the bodhisattva Avalokiteshvara. 
Karmic latencies or imprints. (Skt. vasana, Tib. bakchag) Every action that a 
person does has an imprint which is stored in the eighth consciousness. 
These latencies express themselves later by leaving the eighth 
consciousness and entering the sixth consciousness upon being 
stimulated by external experience. 
Kayas, three. There are three bodies of the Buddha: the nirmanakaya, 
sambhogakaya and dharmakaya. The dharmakaya, also called the "truth 
body," is the complete enlightenment or the complete wisdom of the 
Buddha that is unoriginated wisdom beyond form and manifests in the 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS 149 
sambhogakaya and the nirmanakaya. The sambhogakaya, also called the 
"enjoyment body," manifests only to bodhisattvas. The nirmanakaya, also 
called the "emanation body," manifests in the world and in this context 
manifests as the Shakyamuni Buddha. The fourth kaya is the 
svabhavikakaya, which is the "essence body," the unity of the other three. 
King Indrabhuti. An Indian king during the time of the Buddha who become 
an accomplished master. He symbolizes the person of the highest caliber 
who can use sense pleasures as the path of practice. 
Klesha. (Tib. nyon mong) Also called the "disturbing emotions," these are the 
emotional afflictions or obscurations (in contrast to intellectual 
obscurations) that disturb the clarity of perception. These are also 
translated as "poisons." They include any emotion that disturbs or distorts 
consciousness. The three main kleshas are desire, anger and ignorance. 
The five kleshas are the three above plus pride and envy/jealousy. 
Lama. (Skt. guru) La means nobody above himself or herself in spiritual 
experience and ma means expressing compassion like a mother. Thus 
the union of wisdom and compassion, feminine and masculine qualities. 
Lama is also a title given to a practitioner who has completed some 
extended training. 
Lineage gurus. The lineage gurus are the gurus of the line of transmission of 
what we study and practice. These transmissions date from the teachings 
of the Buddha himself. All of the line of gurus in that transmission 
from the Buddha, who first gave the teachings, up until the present 
time constitute what we call the lineage gurus. 
Lotsawa. Sanskrit for "translator." 
Lower realm. The three lower realms are birth as a hell being, hungry ghost 
and animal. 
Luminosity. (Tib. selwa) In the third turning of the wheel of dharma, the 
Buddha taught that everything is void, but this voidness is not completely 
empty because it has luminosity. Luminosity or clarity allows all 
phenomena to appear and is a characteristic of and inseparable from 
emptiness (Skt. shunyata). 
Luminosity. (Tib. osel) Literally "free from the darkness of unknowing and 
150 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
endowed with the ability to cognize." The two aspects are "empty 
luminosity," like a clear open sky; and "manifest luminosity," such as 
colored light images, and so forth. Luminosity is the uncompounded 
nature present throughout all of samsara and nirvana. 
Madhyamaka. The most influential of the four schools of Indian Buddhism 
founded by Nagarjuna in the second century C.E. The name comes 
from the Sanskrit word meaning "the Middle-way" meaning that it is 
the middle way between eternalism and nihilism. The main postulate 
of this school is that all phenomena -both internal mental events and 
external physical objects -are empty of any true nature. The school 
uses extensive rational reasoning to establish the emptiness of 
phenomena. This school does, however, hold that phenomena do exist 
on the conventional or relative level of reality. 
Mahamudra. (Tib. cha ja chm po) Literally means "great seal" or "great 
symbol," meaning that all phenomena are sealed by the primordially 
perfect true nature. This form of meditation is traced back to Saraha 
(tenth century) and was passed down in the Kagyu school through 
Marpa. This meditative transmission emphasizes perceiving mind 
directly rather than through rational analysis. It also refers to the 
experience of the practitioner where one attains the union of emptiness 
and luminosity and also perceives the non-duality of the phenomenal 
world and emptiness; also the name of Kagyupa lineage. 
Mahapandita. Maha means great and pandita Buddhist scholar. 
Mahasiddha. A practitioner who has a great deal of realization. Maha means 
great and siddha refers to an accomplished practitioner. These were 
particularly Vajrayana practitioners who lived in India between the eight 
and twelfth century and practiced tantra. The biography of some of the 
most famous is found in The Eighty-four Mahasiddhas. 
Mahayana. (Tib. tek pa chen po) Literally, the "Great Vehicle." These are the 
teachings of the second turning of the wheel of dharma, which emphasize 
shunyata (see shunyata), compassion and universal Buddha nature. The 
purpose of enlightenment is to liberate all sentient beings from suffering 
as well as oneself. Mahayana schools of philosophy appeared several 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS 151 
hundred years after the Buddha's death, although the tradition is traced 
to teachings he gave at Rajgriha, or Vulture Peak Mountain. 
Maitripa-was a guru ofMarpa, the Tibetan forefather of the Kagyu lineage. 
Thus it is through Maitripa that Maitreya and Asanga's crucial work on 
Buddha nature, the Uttaratantrashastra (Anuttara), became widely 
followed in Tibet. It is said that he had been a student ofNaropa when 
the latter was head of Nalanda monastic university. Maitripa also 
transmitted to Marpa the esoteric aspect of Buddha nature embodied 
in the Mahamudra teachings, which treat the topic of mind in great 
detail and provide a wide range of progressive, highly refined 
meditations. Maitripa was brought to enlightenment through 
Mahamudra under his guru Savari, who received the complete teachings 
ofMahamudra from Nagarjuna, who received them from Sahara, whom 
Marpa encountered in his dream state. 
Mantra. (Tib. ngags) 1) A synonym for Vajrayana. 2) A particular combination 
of sounds symbolizing the nature of a deity, for example OM MANI 
PEME HUNG. These are invocations to various meditation deities which 
are recited in Sanskrit. These Sanskrit syllables, representing various 
energies, are repeated in different Vajrayana practices. 
Mara. Difficulties encountered by the practitioner. The Tibetan word means 
heavy or thick. In Buddhism mara symbolizes the passions that 
overwhelm human beings as well as everything that hinders the arising 
of wholesome roots and progress on the path to enlightenment. There 
are four kinds: skandha-mara, which is incorrect view of self; klesha­
mara, which is being overpowered by negative emotions; matyu-mara, 
which is death and interrupts spiritual practice; and devaputra-mara, 
which is becoming stuck in the bliss that comes from meditation. 
Marpa. ( 1012-1097 C. E.) Marpa was known for being a Tibetan who made 
three trips to India and brought back many tantric texts, including the 
Six Yogas of Naropa, the Guyhasamaja, and the Chakrasamvara 
practices. His root teacher was Tilopa, the founder of the Kagyu lineage 
and the teacher of Naropa. Marpa initiated and founded the Kagyu 
lineage in Tibet. 
152 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODROTHAYE 
Mental consciousness. The sixth consciousness is the faculty of thinking which 
produces thoughts based upon the experiences of the five sense­
consciousnesses or its own previous content. (see eight consciousnesses). 
Mental factors. Mental factors are contrasted to mind in that they are more 
long-term propensities of mind including eleven virtuous factors such 
as faith, detachment and equanimity; the six root defilements such as 
desire, anger and pride; the rwenty secondary defilements such as 
resentment, dishonesty and harmfulness. 
Middle-way or Madhyamaka school. A philosophical school founded by 
Nagarjuna and based on the Prajnaparamita sutras of emptiness. 
Milarepa. ( 1040-1123 C. E.) Milarepa was a student of Marpa who attained 
enlightenment in one lifetime. Mila, named by the deities and repa 
means white cotton. His student Gampopa established the (Dakpo) 
Kagyu lineage in Tibet. 
Mind-only school. Also called Chittamatra school. This is one of the major 
schools in the Mahayana tradition founded in the fourth century by 
Asanga that emphasized everything is mental events. 
Mudra. In this book it is a "hand seal" or gesture that is performed in specific 
tantric rituals to symbolize certain aspects of the practice being done. 
Also can mean spiritual consort, or the "bodily form" of a deity. 
Nadi. The channels in the vajra body through which the winds flow. 
Nagarjuna. An Indian master of philosophy. Founder of the Madhyamaka 
school and author of the Knowledge of the Middle "Way and other 
important works. (second -third century) 
Naropa. (956-1 040 C.E.) An Indian master best known for transmitting 
many Vajrayana teachings to Marpa who took these back to Tibet before 
the Moslem invasion of India. 
Nihilism. (Tib. chad Ita) Literally, "the view of discontinuance." The extreme 
view of nothingness: no rebirth or karmic effects, and the non-existence 
of a mind after death. 
Nirmanakaya. (Tib. tulku) There are three bodies of the Buddha; the 
nirmanakaya or "emanation body" manifests in the world and in this 
context manifests as the Shakyamuni Buddha. (see kayas, three.) 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS 153 
Nirvana. Literally, "extinguished." Individuals live in samsara and with 
spiritual practice can attain a state ofliberation in which all false ideas 
and conflicting emotions have been extinguished. This is called nirvana. 
The nirvana of a Hinayana practitioner is freedom from cyclic existence 
as an arhat. The nirvana of a Mahayana practitioner is Buddhahood, 
free from extremes of dwelling in either samsara or the perfect peace of 
an arhat. 
Sometimes it is categorized as three types: nirvana of naturalness, 
which is ground nirvana; nirvana of cessation, which is path nirvana; 
and non-abiding nirvana, which is the reward or fruition nirvana. 
Non-distraction. (Tib. yeng me) Not straying from the continuity of the 
practice. 
Non-fabrication. (Tib. zo me) The important key point in meditation of 
Mahamudra and Dzogchen; that innate wakefulness is not created 
through intellectual effort. 
Non-meditation. (Tib. gom me) The state of not holding on to an object 
meditated upon nor a subject who meditates. Also refers to the fourth 
stage of Mahamudra in which nothing further needs to be meditated 
upon or cultivated. 
Non-thought. (Tib. mi tog) A state in which conceptual thinking is absent. 
Obscurations. There are two categories of obscuration or defilement that cover 
one's Buddha nature: the defilement of disturbing emotions (see afflictive 
obscurations); and the defilement of latent tendencies sometimes called 
the obscuration of dualistic perception, or the intellectual/cognitive 
obscurations (see cognitive obscurations). The first category prevents 
sentient beings from freeing themselves from samsara, while the second 
prevents them from gaining accurate knowledge and realizing truth. 
Occurrence. The period when thoughts are arising in the mind. Compare 
with "stillness." 
One-pointedness. The first stage in the practice of Mahamudra. 
One taste. The third stage in the practice of Mahamudra. 
Ordinary Mind. (Tib. tamal kyi shepa) There is no need to do anything to 
your present wakefulness at the moment of recognizing; it is already as 
!54 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODROTHAYE 
it is. That is the true meaning of naked ordinary mind, a famous term 
in Tibetan. It means not tampered with. There is no "thing" which 
needs to be accepted or rejected; it is simply as it is. The term 'ordinary 
mind' is the most immediate and accurate term to describe the nature 
of mind. No matter what terminology is being utilized within the 
Middle-way, Mahamudra or Dzogchen, naked ordinary mind is the 
simplest term. 
Pandita. A great scholar. 
Path of Liberation. The path of Mahamudra practice. 
Path of Means. Refers to the Six Yogas of Naropa as well as to the stages of 
creation and completion with attributes. 
Prana. Life supporting energy. The "winds" or energy-currents of the vajra 
body. 
Prajna. (Tib. she rab) In Sanskrit it means "perfect knowledge" and can 
mean wisdom, understanding or discrimination. Usually it means the 
wisdom of seeing things from a high (i.e., non-dualistic) point of view. 
Prajnaparamita. Transcendent perfect knowledge. The Tibetan literally 
means, "gone to the other side" or "gone beyond" as expressed in the 
Prajnaparamita mantra, "Om gate gate paragate parasamgate bodhi 
svaha." The realization of emptiness in the Prajnaparamita Hridaya or 
Heart Sutra, made possible by the extraordinarily profound dharma of 
the birth of Shakyamuni Buddha in the world and the practices that 
came from it, such as the Vajrayana tantras, which make use of 
visualization and the control of subtle physical energies. 
Prajnaparamita sutras. Used to refer to a collection of about 40 Mahayana 
sutras that all deal with the realization of prajna. 
Pure realm. Realms created by Buddhas which are totally free from suffering 
and dharma there can be received directly. These realms are presided 
over by various Buddhas such as Amitabha, Avalokiteshvara, and 
Maitreya who presides over Tushita. 
Rangjung Dorje. (1284-1339 C.E.) The Third Karmapa, especially well 
known for writing a series of texts widely used in the Kagyu school. 
Rtzngtong school. The Madhyamaka or Middle-way is divided into two major 
GLOSSARY 0 F TERMS 155 
schools; Rangtong {empty of self) and Shentong {empty of other). 
Rangtong is from the second turning of the wheel of dharma and teaches 
that reality is empty of self and beyond concepts. 
Recognition. In this context it means "recognizing the nature of mind." 
Red element. The residual seed essence of the mother's ovum, obtained at 
conception, which remains present in the centre of the body below the 
navel for the duration of a person's life. 
Relative truth. (Tib. kunsop) There are two truths: relative and absolute or 
ultimate truth. Relative truth is the perception of an ordinary 
{unenlightened) being who sees the world with all his or her projections 
based on the false belief in "!" and "other." 
Rigpa. The primordial, non-dual awareness in the Dzogchen teachings. 
Rinpoche. Literally, "very precious" and is used as a term of respect for a 
Tibetan guru. 
Root lama. A practitioner ofVajrayana can have several types of root guru: 
the vajra master who confers empowerment, who bestows reading 
transmission, or who explains the meaning of the tantras. The ultimate 
root guru is the master who gives the "pointing out instructions" so 
that one recognizes the nature of mind. 
Sakya Pandita. A hereditary head of the Sakya lineage. A great scholar ( 1181-
1251 C.E.) 
Samadhi. A state of meditation that is non-dualistic. There is an absence of 
discrimination between self and other. Also called meditative absorption 
or one-pointed meditation, this is the highest form of meditation. 
Sa maya. The vows or commitments made in the Vajrayana to a teacher or to 
a practice. Many details exist but essentially it consists of outwardly, 
maintaining a harmonious relationship with the vajra master and one's 
dharma friends and inwardly, not straying from the continuity of the 
practice. 
Sambhogakaya. There are three bodies of the Buddha, the sambhogakaya, 
also called the "enjoyment body," is a realm of the dharmakaya that 
only manifests to bodhisattvas {see kayas, three). 
Samsara. "Cyclic existence." The conditioned existence of ordinary life in which 
!56 THF SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
suffering occurs because one still possesses attachment, aggression and 
ignorance. It is contrasted to nirvana. Through the force of karma 
motivated by ignorance, desire and anger one is forced to take on the 
impure aggregates and circle the wheel of existence until liberation. 
Sentient beings. With consciousness; an animated being as opposed to an 
inanimate object. All beings with consciousness or mind who have not 
attained the liberation ofBuddhahood. This includes those individuals 
caught in the sufferings of samsara as well as those who have attained 
the levels of a bodhisattva. 
Shamatha. (Tib. shinay) See tranquility meditation. 
Shamatha with support. The practice of calming the mind while using an 
object of concentration, material or mental, or simply the breath. 
Shamatha without support. The act of calming the mind without any 
particular object, resting undistractedly. This practice serves as a prelude 
for Mahamudra and should not be mistaken for the ultimate result. 
Shentong school. The Madhyamaka or Middle-way is divided into two major 
schools, Rangtong (empty of self) and Shentong (empty of other). 
Shentong is from the third turning of the wheel of dharma and explains 
that ultimate reality is emptiness and luminosity inseparable. 
Shunyata. See emptiness. 
Siddha. An accomplished Buddhist practitioner. 
Siddhi. "Accomplishment." The spiritual accomplishments of accomplished 
practitioners. Usually refers to the "supreme siddhi" of complete 
enlightenment, but can also mean the "common siddhis," eight 
mundane accomplishments. 
Simplicity. I) The absence of creating mental constructs or conceptual 
formations about the nature of things. 2) The second stage in the practice 
of Mahamudra. 
Six Dharmas (Yogas} of Naropa. These six special yogic practices were 
transmitted from Naropa to Marpa and consist of the subtle heat 
practice, the illusory body practice, the dream yoga practice, the 
luminosity practice, the ejection of consciousness practice and the bardo 
practice. 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS 157 
Six realms. The realms of the six classes of beings: gods, demigods, humans, 
animals, hungry ghosts and hell beings. These are the possible types of 
births for beings in samsara and are: the god realm in which gods have 
great pride, the jealous god realm in which the jealous gods try to maintain 
what they have, the human realm which is the best realm because one 
has the possibility of achieving enlightenment, the animal realm 
characterized by stupidity, the hungry ghost realm characterized by great 
craving, and the hell realm characterized by aggression. 
Spiritual song. See doha. 
Stillness. Absence of thought activity and disturbing emotions, but with subtle 
fixation on this stillness. 
Subtle channels. (Skt. nadi, Tib. tsa) These refer to the subtle channels which 
are not anatomical ones but ones in which psychic energies or "winds" 
(Skt. prana, Tib. lung) travel. 
Subtle heat. (Tib. tummo) An advanced Vajrayana practice for combining 
bliss and emptiness producing heat as a by product. 
Sugata. An epithet for the Buddha. 
Sugatagarbha. (Tib. de sheg nying po) Buddha nature or that enlightened 
essence present in all beings that allows them to have the capacity to 
achieve enlightenment. It is closely related to tathagatagarbha. 
Supreme siddhi. Another word for enlightenment. 
Sutra. Sometimes "surra" is used to cover all of the teachings given by the Buddha 
himself. But correctly it means one of the three sections of the dharma 
called the Tripi taka or Three Baskets. In the Tripi taka there are the Sutras, 
the Vinaya and the Abhidharma. The sutras are mainly concerned with 
meditation or samadhi; the Abhidharma is mainly concerned with the 
development of wisdom and understanding; and the Vinaya is mainly 
concerned with discipline and the rules of morality and conduct. 
Sutra Mahamudra. The Mahamudra system based on the Prajnaparamita 
scriptures and emphasizing Shamatha, Vipashyana and the progressive 
journey through the five paths and ten bhumis. 
Svabhavikakaya. The "essence body." Sometimes counted as the fourth kaya, 
the unity of the first three. 
158 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
Tantra. Literally, tantra means "continuity," and in Buddhism it refers to 
two specific things: the texts (resultant texts, or those that take the 
result as the path) that describe the practices leading from ignorance to 
enlightenment, including commentaries by tantric masters; and the way 
to enlightenment itself, encompassing the ground, path and fruition. 
One can divide Buddhism into the surra tradition and the tantra 
tradition. The surra tradition primarily involves the academic study of 
the Mahayana texts and the tantric path primarily involves practicing 
the Vajrayana practices. The tantras are primarily the texts of the 
Vajrayana practices. 
Tantra Mahamudra. The same as mantra Mahamudra. The Mahamudra 
practice connected to the Six Yogas of Naropa. 
Tathagatagarbha. (Tib. deshin sheg pai nying po) This is the seed or essence of 
tathata (suchness) and is also called Buddha essence or enlightened essence. 
Terton. (Tib.) A master in the Tibetan tradition who discovers treasures 
(terma) which are teachings concealed by great masters of the past. 
Terma. (Tib.) Literally, hidden treasure. Works which were hidden by great 
bodhisattvas and later rediscovered. They may be actual physical texts or 
they may come from "the sky" as transmissions from the sambhogakaya. 
Three realms. These are three categories of samsara. The desire realm includes 
existences where beings are born with solid bodies due to their karma, 
ranging from the deva paradises to the hell realms. The form realm is 
where beings are born due to the power of meditation, and their bodies 
are of subtle form in this realm. These are the meditation paradises. 
The formless realm is where beings due to their meditation (samadhi) 
have entered a state of meditation after death and the processes of 
thought and perception have ceased. 
Three roots. Guru, yidam and dakini. Guru is the root of blessings, yidam of 
accomplishment and dakini of activity. 
Three sufferings. These are the suffering of suffering, the suffering of change, 
and pervasive suffering (meaning the inherent suffering in all of 
samsara). 
Three vehicles. Hinayana, Mahayana and Vajrayana. 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS 159 
Tilopa. (928-1 009 C. E.) One of the eighty-four mahasiddhas who became 
the guru ofNaropa who transmitted his teachings to the Kagyu lineage 
in Tibet. 
Tranquility meditation. (Tib. Shinay, Skt. Shamatha) One of the two main 
types of meditation, calm abiding, the meditative practice of calming 
the mind in order to rest free from the disturbance of thought activity; 
the other is insight or Vipashyana. 
Tulku. (Tib. Skt. nirmanakaya) The Tibetan means "Multiple body." It is 
the term used for describing the emanation body of an enlightened 
being or bodhisattva. The syllable tul has both direct and indirect 
meanings. The direct meaning is "multiple" and the indirect meaning, 
"manifestation," which refers to the sending out of compassion. It is 
the illusory emanation of the dharmakaya as a nirmanakaya form. Ku 
means body. In Tibet, however, it came to mean the emanation of an 
advanced Buddhist master who chooses to continue to incarnate for 
the benefit of others. 
Tummo. (Tib.) An advanced Vajrayana practice for combining bliss and 
emptiness which produces heat as a by product. This is one of the Six 
Yogas of Naropa. 
Two accumulations. The accumulation of merit with concepts and the 
accumulation of wisdom beyond concepts. 
~jra. (Tib. dorje) Usually translated "diamond like." This may be an 
implement held in the hand during certain Vajrayana ceremonies, or it 
can refer to a quality which is so pure and so enduring that it is like a 
diamond. 
Vajradhara. (Tib. Dorje Chang) "Holder of the vajra." ~jra means 
indestructible and dhara means holding, embracing or inseparable. The 
central figure in the Kagyu refuge tree, and indicating the transmission 
of the close lineage of the Mahamudra teachings to Tilopa. Vajradhara 
symbolizes the primordial wisdom of the dharmakaya and wears the 
ornaments of the sambhogakaya Buddha, symbolizing its richness. 
~jrapani. A major bodhisattva said to be lord of the mantra and a major 
protector ofTibetan Buddhism. 
160 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODROTHAYE 
Vajrasattva. The Buddha of purification. Vajrasattva practice is part of the 
four preliminary practices. A sambhogakaya Buddha who embodies all 
the five families. He is also a major source of purification practices. 
Vajravarahi. A dakini who is the consort of Chakrasamvara. She is the main 
yidam of the Kagyu lineage and the embodiment of wisdom. 
Vajrayana. Literally, "diamond-like" or "indestructible capacity." Vajra here 
refers to method, so the method yana. There are three major traditions 
of Buddhism (Hinayana, Mahayana, Vajrayana). The Vajrayana is based 
on the tantras and emphasizes the clarity aspect of phenomena. A 
practitioner of the method of taking the result as the path. 
View, meditation and action. The philosophical orientation, the act of growing 
accustomed to that-usually in sitting practice- and the implementation 
of that insight during the activities of daily life. Each of the three vehicles 
has its particular definition of view, meditation and action. 
Vipashyana meditation. Sanskrit for "insight meditation." This meditation 
develops insight into the nature of reality (Skt. dharmata). One of the 
two main aspects of meditation practice, the other being Shamatha. 
Wangchuk Dorje. (1556-1603 C.E.) The Ninth Karmapa. 
Wisdom of nature of phenomena. This is transcendent knowledge (jnana) of 
the true nature of reality, not as it appears to individuals in samsara. 
Wisdom of multiplicity or variety. This is the transcendent knowledge (jnana) 
of the variety of phenomena. 
Wheel of dharma. (Skt. dharmachakra) The Buddha's teachings correspond 
to three levels which very briefly are: the first turning was the teachings 
on the Four Noble Truths and the teaching of the egolessness of person; 
the second turning was the teachings on emptiness and the emptiness 
of phenomena; the third turning was the teachings on luminosity and 
Buddha nature. 
White element. The residual seed essence of the father's sperm, obtained at 
conception, which remains present in the centre of the body at the very 
top of the head for the duration of a person's life. 
Ytzna. Means capacity. There are three yanas, narrow, (Hinayana) great 
(Mahayana) and indestructible (Vajrayana). 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS 161 
Yidam. (Tib.) Yi means mind and dam means pure, or yi means your mind 
and dam means inseparable. The yidam represents the practitioner's 
awakened nature or pure appearance. A tantric deity that embodies 
qualities ofBuddhahood and is practiced in the Vajrayana. Also called 
a tutelary deity. 
Yidam meditation. Yidam meditation is the Vajrayana practice that uses the 
visualization of a yidam. 
Yoga. "Natural condition." A person who practices this is called a yogi, 
characterized by leaving everything natural, just as it is, e.g. not washing 
or cutting your hair and nails etc. A female practitioner is called a yogini. 
Yoga tantra. Literally, "union tantra" and refers to a tantra that places emphasis 
on internal meditations. 
Yogi. Tantric practitioner. 
Yogini. Female tantric practitioner. 

Glossary of Tibetan Terms 
Pronounced Spelled Meaning 
bakchag bag chags latencies 
chakgya chenpo phyag rgya chan po Mahamudra 
cho chos dharma 
dang gdangs brilliance 
damar gyi shepa da lta'i shes pa mind of nowness 
deshin skekpai nying po de bzhin gsheg pai' tathagatagarbha 
snymgpo 
dondam don dam pai bden pa ultimate truth 
dorje rdo rje vajra 
Dorje Chang rdo rje chang Vajradhara 
Dzogchen rdrogs chen Dzogchen 
golsa sum go! sa gsum Three errors 
gomme sgom med non-meditation 
kagyu bka' 'gyur Kagyu 
kunzhi namshe kun gzhi' rnam shes alaya consciousness 
kunrop kun rdrob relative truth 
!hen chig !han chig co-emergent 
long cho dzok pay ku longs spyod rdzogs sambhogakaya 
pa'i sku 
lotsawa lo tsa ba translator 
lung rlung prana 
lung lung reading instruction 
marigpa rna rig pa bewilderment 
mitog mi rrog non-thought 
mon nong nyon mongs disturbing emotion 
164 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
nam nyams temporary 
experiences 
namshe rnam par shes pa consciOusness 
nelug gnas lugs natural state 
ngags ngak mantra 
Ngondro ' preliminaries sngon gro 
norbu sum nor bu gsum three gems 
nyam tog nyams nogs experience and 
realization 
osel 'od gsa! clear light 
rang gsel rang gsa! self-illuminating 
rang rig rang sal rang rig self-knowing 
rigpa nyingpo rig pa snying po can heart essence 
of awareness 
rigpa ngpa awareness 
kyen sum rkyen gsum three conditions 
nalma rna! rna natural state 
salwa gsa! ba luminosity 
sang gye yeshe sangs rgyas ye shes awakened awareness 
sherab shes rab prajna 
shi gshis true nature 
shinay zhi gnas tranquility 
meditation 
soma so rna freshness 
shorba shor sa four deviations 
thamal gyi shepa tha mal gyi shes pa ordinary mind 
tise tshig seal 
togyal thod rgal leaping over 
tri khrid practice instruction 
trullug 'khrullug confused aspect 
tsal rtsal dynamic energy 
tulku sprul sku emanation body 
tummo gtum mo subtle heat 
GLOSSARY OF TIBETAN TERMS 165 
yeng me yengs med non-distraction 
yes he ye shes primordial wisdom 
Yidam yidam med deity 
ying dbyings dhatu space 
zo me bzo med non-fabrication 
zung jug ,. unity zung jug 

Bibliography 
Kagyu Lineage Prayer (Pron. Dorje Tungma). This chant in libetan with an 
English translation and a commentary by Thrangu Rinpoche is available in 
Showing the Path to Liberation (New Zealand, Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal, 2002). 
Rain of Wisdom, translated by Nalanda Translation Committee. Boulder: 
Shambhala, 1980. A collection of the spiritual songs of the Kagyu masters. 
]amgon Kongtrul, Lodro Thaye 
The five treasuries are given in Endnote 1. 
Keith Dowman 
Masters of Mahamudra (Albany, NY: State Universiry of New York, 1985). 
Keith Dowman translated a work by Abhayadarra who collected the stories 
of eighty-four mahasiddhas. It should be noted that there were many 
more mahasiddhas than eight-four. 
Nagarjuna 
Knowledge of the Middle "Way (Skt Mula-madhyama-kakakarika, Tib. dbu rna 
rrsa ba'i shes rab) This work has been translated several rimes. A new 
translation is Mulamadhyamakakarika ofNagarjuna by David Kalupahana, 
India, Motilal Banarsidass. 
Shantideva 
A Guide to the Bodhisattva's "Way of Lifo (Skr. Bodhicaryavatara, Tib. byang 
chub sems dpa'i spyod pa Ia 'jug pa). Translated several times. One is 
Guide to the Bodhisattva "Way of Lifo translated by V. and T. Wallace Ithaca: 
New York: Snow Lion Publications. 
Tashi Namgyal 
Moonlight of Mahamudra (Skr. none, Tib. phyag chen zla ba' i od zer) Translated 
as Mahamudra: the Quintessence of Mind and Meditation by Lhalungpa 
and published by Shambhala Publications, 1986. An extremely derailed 
description ofMahamudra meditation. Thrangu Rinpoche's commentary 
168 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
on this text is Essentials of Mahamudra: Looking Directly at the Mind. 
Boston: Wisdom Publications, 2004. 
Thrangu Rinpoche 
Essentials of Mahamudra: Looking Directly at the Mind. Boston: Wisdom 
Publications, 2004. A commentary on the Moonlight of Mahamudra. 
The Practice of Tranquility and Insight translated by Peter Roberts. Ithaca, 
New York: Snow Lion Publications, 1993. A detailed commentary on 
Shamatha and Vipashyana meditation and their union. 
Transcending Ego: Distinguishing Consciousness from Wisdom. Boulder: Namo 
Buddha Publications, 2001. 
The Uttaratantra, A Treatise on Buddha-Essence. USNNew Zealand: Namo 
Buddha & Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal Publication 2003. 
Uttara Tantra by Asanga and Maitreya (Skt. ratnagotravibhaga, Tib. rgyud 
bla ma, Pron. "gyu lama") This text was written by Asanga who received 
the transmission from the bodhisatrva Maitreya in Sanskrit in about the 
fourth century. The complete Tibetan text has been translated by 
Obermiller (E. Obermiller, Acta Orientalia, IX, 19 31, pp. 81-306) and 
has been reprinted more recently in a book edited by H. S. Prasad (The 
UttaratantraofMaitreya. Delhi, India: Sri Satguru Publications, 1991). 
Thrangu Rinpoche has also written a commentary on this text called The 
Uttara Tantra: A Treatise on Buddha Nature. Boulder, Colorado: Namo 
Buddha Publications, 1994. This book also includes a translation of the 
404 root verses and Rinpoche's commentary. 
The Heart Sutra. (Skt. Prajnaparamita-hridaya-sutra, Tib. shes rab snyingpo'i 
mdo, Pron. "sherab nyinpo dho") Translated by Conze (I 959) as Hridya­
mahayana-sutra. One of the most important Mahayana surras which is 
often chanted each morning in dharma centers. It is a short sutra of the 
Buddha of several hundred words summarizing the Prajnaparamita 
teaching on the meditation on emptiness 
The Heart Sutra. (Skt. Maha-prajnaparamita-mitahriidaya sutra, Tib. bcom 
/dan 'das mashes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa'i snying po'i mdo). This is a 
surra by the Buddha which is a condensation of the Prajnaparamita sutra. 
This surra is chanted daily in almost all Mahayana Buddhist centers. 
A 
affiictive consciousness 69, 70 
alaya consciousness 61, 69 
B 
bhumi 40, 100 
bindu 92 
blessing 29-36,45-47,76,89-91, 
120, 
bodhichitta 41, 42 
bodhisattva level 40, 48, 100, 128, 
129 
Buddha-nature 54, 56, 65, 66, 86, 
113 
Buddhahood 40,41,45,49,58, 
105, 119, 122, 128 
c 
chakra 34, 41 
Chakrasamvara 37, 40, 123 
clarity 34, 37, 38, 52, 57-59,61-
64,67,69,70,80,82-85,91-
92, 116, 120, 124, 125 
dear light 65, 83, 101, 105, 106, 
118, 119 
co-emergent 69, 75, 76, 85 
completion stage 58, 126 
consciousness 30, 31, 57, 60-64, 
68-71,95, 96, 104 
creation stage 58 
D 
Dakpo Kagyu 29, 36 Index 
desirerealm 91,92 
devotion 29, 30, 32-34, 36, 37, 43, 
45,49, 76,89,90 
dharmadhatu 56, 57, 65, 66, 104-
106, 110, 117 
dharmakaya 30, 31, 34, 35, 52, 65, 
71, 75, 76,94-96, 109, 114-
117,125,126 
dharmata 42, 105, 118 
disturbing emotion 71, 81, 91, 110 
doha 29 
Dusum Khyenpa 40 
Dzogchen 56 
E 
eight worldly concerns 33, 34 
eighth consciousness 61, 62, 70 
empowerment 34, 35, 40 
enlightenment 40, 41, 46, 83, 116, 
122, 128 
F 
five paths 100, 107 
five wisdoms 1 04 
form realm 91, 92 
formless realm 92, 108 
foundation consciousness 60-63, 68, 
69-71 
foundation Mahamudra 49, 50-52, 
57, 74, 113, 119 
four yogas 100, 106, 107 
fruition Mahamudra 49, 50, 52-54, 
75, 113, 114, 119, 121 
170 THE SPIRITUAL SONG OF LODRO THAYE 
G 
Gampopa 40-42, 120 
guru yoga 33, 37 
H 
Hevajra 39 
J 
Jamgon Kongtrul 31-36,41,42, 
45-47,49,50,80,81,94, 
108-110,119,123,124 
K 
Kagyu 29,33,36,37,40,41,46, 
75, 85, 109, 110, 121, 122, 
126 
Kagyu lineage 33, 37, 41, 109, 
110, 126 
Karma Kagyu 40, 41 
Karma Pakshi 33 
King lndrabhuti 33 
klesha consciousness 61 
L 
lineage lama 29, 30, 36, 41, 42, 
43,45,46,109 
luminosity 34, 52, 57, 58, 61, 
62,64-66,70, 72,83, 101, 
105, 106, 116, 118, 124 
M 
Madhyamaka 53, 58 Milarepa 40, 47, 120 
Mind-only 58, 60 
Moonbeams ofMahamudra 107, 108 
N 
nadi 92 
namshe 57 
Naropa 37, 38, 40, 47, 108, 109 
nirmanakaya 72, 114, 116, 117, 
124, 125 
nirvana 54, 57, 73, 74, 118 
non-thought 35, 85, 91, 92, 120 
0 
obscuration 38, 51, 69, 105, I 07, 
109, 114 
ordinary mind 79, 85-87, 94, 95, 
101, 106, 114, 120 
p 
path Mahamudra 49, 52, 53, 74, 
75, 89, 99, 110, 113 
path of liberation 37 
path of method 37 
Perna Nyingche Wangpo 32,34-36, 
46,47, 109,123 
prajna 37, 42, 73, 93, 118 
Prajnaparamita 123 
prana 37,38,39,92 
preliminary practice 77 
primordial wisdom 48, 94, 95, 96, 
103, 104, 105, 114, 118 
Mahamudra meditation 29, 83, 94, R 
108, 120 
mara 83, 84 
Marpa 37, 39, 40, 47 
mental consciousness 61, 63, 64 
Middle-way 55, 56, 58, 66, 71,86 Rangjung Dorje 56 
Rangtong 55, 56 
red element 31 
rigpa 94 
root guru 30, 32 
root lama 32, 34, 36, 41, 90, 113, 
123 
s 
Sakya Pandita 108 
Samadhi 29 
samadhi 37, 40, 74, 76, 77, 84, 
85, 101 
Sambhogakaya 116, 131 
sambhogakaya 30, 72, 114, 115, 
116, 124' 125 
Samsara 54 
samsara 54, 55, 57, 68, 70, 71, 
73, 74, 85, 96, 118, 122 
Shamatha 39, 77, 91, 96, 97 
Shantideva 81 
Shentong 56, 66 
siddha 36, 38, 39, 40, 41, 46, 
47,48,49,122 
siddhi 30, 39, 49 
Six Realm 1 0, 127 
Six Yogas ofNaropa 37,38 
spiritual song 29, 30, 43, 1 08 
subtle heat 38, 39, 40 
Sugatagarbha 65 
sugatagarbha 65, 66 
Sutra 155, 158 INDEX 
sutra 13, 14, 26, 29, 42, 55, 56, 
67, 87, 103, 122, 126, 141, 
142, 146, 152, 155, 158 
T 
tantra 53, 55, 56, 66, 122, 123 
tathagatagarbha 54, 56, 105 
ten bodhisattva stages 107 
Tilopa 36, 37, 40, 46, 47 
togyal 93 
twelve stages 1 07-1 08 
two accumulations 42 
u 
Uttaratantra 53, 66 
v 
Vajradhara 30-32, 37, 90 
Vajrayogini 39 
Vipashyana 91, 96 
w 
white element 30, 31 
wish-fulfilling jewel 36-37 
y 
yeshe 31, 43, 52, 57,95 
yidam 58 171 
Care of Dharma Books 
Dharma books contain the teachings of the Buddha. They have the 
power to protect against lower rebirth and to point the way to liberation. 
Therefore, they should be treated with respect. 
These considerations may be also kept in mind for Dharma artwork, 
as well as the written teachings and artwork of other religions. 


