

Songs of 
Naropa 
RANGJUNG YESHE BOOKS 
Padmasambhava 
Advice from the Lotus-Born 
Dakini Teachings (Shambhala Pub/.) 
Padmasambhava andJamgon Kongtriil 
Light of Wisdom, Vol I (Shambhala Publ} 
Yeshe Tsogyal 
The~otus-Born (Shambhala Pub/.) 
Gampopa 
The Precious Garland of the Sublime Path 
Tsele Natsok Rangdrol 
ThelleartoftheA1atter 
A1irror ofA1indfulness 
Empowerment 
Lamp of A1ahamudra 
Mipham Rinpoche 
Gateway to Knowledge, Vol I 
Tulku Urgyen Rinpoche 
Rainbow Painting 
Repeating the Words of the Buddha 
Ten Lamas 
In A1emory of Kyabje Tu/ku Urgyen Rinpoche 
Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche 
Songs ofNaropa 
King of Samadhi 
Buddha Nature 
ChOkyi Nyima Rinpoche 
Indisputable Truth 
The Union of A1ahamudra and Dzogchen 
Song of Karmapa 
Bardo Guidebook 
Tullru Thondup 
Enlightened Living 
Orgyen Tobgyal Rinpoche 
Life and Teachings of Chokgyur Lingpa 
Songs of 
Naropa 
Thrangu Rinpoche 
COMMENTARIES ON 
SONGS OF REALIZATION 
Translated from Tibetan by Erik Perna Kunsang 
Edited by Marcia Binder Schmidt 
with Kerry Moran 
RANGJUNG YESHE PUBLICATIONS 
BouoHANATH, HoNG KoNG & EsBY 
RANGJUNG YESHE PuBLICATIONS 
xzs RoBINSON RoAD, FLAT 6A 
HONG KONG 
AoDRESS LETTERS TO: 
RANGJUNG YESHE PUBLICATIONS 
P.O. Box I2oo, 
KATHMANDU, NEPAL 
CoMMENTARY: coPYRIGHT© I997 KHENCHEN THRANGu RINPOCHE 
SONGS: COPYRIGHT © I997 ERIK HEIN SCHMIDT 
IJS798642 
FIRST EDITION I997 
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No PART OF THIS BOOK MAY BE REPRODUCED 
WITHOUT WRITTEN PERMISSION FROM THE PUBLISHER 
PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
ON RECYCLED ACID-FREE PAPER 
PUBLICATION DATA: 
THRANGU RlNPOCHE, KHENCHEN (B. I9JJ). TRANSLATED FROM THE 
TIBETAN BY ERIK PEMA KuNSANG (ERIK HEIN ScHMIDT). EDITED BY 
MARCIA BINDER ScHMIDT, WITH KERRY MoRAN. 
IST EDITION. 
TITLE: SONGS OF NAROPA 
ISBN 962-734I-28-2 (PBK.) 
I. SONGS OF NAROPA, COMMENTARY ON. 2. VAJRAYANA PHILOSOPHY­
BuDDHISM. 3· BuDDHISM- TIBET. I. TITLE. 
AN ORAL COMMENTARY ON: 
TIBETAN TITLES: 
LTA BA MOOR BSDUS PA, PHAG RGYA CHEN PO TSHIG BSDUS PA 
ENGLISH TITLES: 
THE VIEW, CoNCISELY PuT & A SuMMARY OF MAHAMUDRA 
CovER DESIGN: MARCIA BINDER ScHMIDT 
PHOTO OF NAROPA: WARD HoLMES, FROM TANKA AT PULLAHARI 
MoNASTERY, NEPAL; COLLECTION OF )AMGON RINPOCHE 
PHOTO OF KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE: GLORIA jONES 
Contents 
Foreword by Thrangu Rinpoche 
7 
The View, Concisely Put 
9 
Commentary 
17 
A Summary ofMahamudra 
95 
Commentary 
101 
Acknowledgements 
199 

Foreword 
The main practice in the Kagyii teaching system is Mahamudra. 
The lineage of Mahamudra chiefly comes through Marpa Lotsawa's 
two root gurus, Naropa and Maitripa. The texts explained here-A 
Summary of Mahamudra and The View, Concisely Put-were spoken by 
Naropa. 
Naropa's songs are very important for practitioners of Mahamudra, 
pithy words, rich with meaning. This is why I chose to teach them 
during my courses. The songs and my explanations are now translated 
by lotsawa Erik. These teachings are about essential meditation train­
ing. I consider them very important for future students to pay attention 
to and study. Doing so will greatly benefit one's understanding of the 
key points ofMahamudra. 
-Thrangu Rinpoche 
7 

The View, Concisely Put 

The View, Concisely Put 
In Sanskrit: Adhi Siddhi Sama Nama 
In Tibetan: Ita ba mdor bsdus pa zhes bya ba, 
[Tawa Dordupa]. 
In English: The View, Concisely Put. 
Homage to the Vajra Dakini! 
To the omniscient lord of refuge, 
The protector of beings, I pay homage! 
After pursuing statements and reasoning 
I have condensed and established the true meaning. 
All these apparent and existing phenomena 
Are nowhere apart from mind, your own awareness. 
Since it perceives and is cognizant, 
It is like experience that is self-known. 
If this mind was not like that 
There would be no link and therefore no experience. 
This is how I have established the relative: 
"Understand that all phenomena are based on mind," as 
it is said. 
II 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RrNPOCHE 
The very basis of phenomena, which is mind essence, 
Can be analyzed, dissected with reasoning, and so forth, 
But this naturally luminous mind 
And the momentary defilement of thought, these two, 
Whether they are one or different 
Is a topic of extreme profundity. 
Because of this depth, scholars analyze. 
Though they explain, I shall not write about it here. 
This mind that knows emptiness 
Is itself the awakened mind, bodhichitta. 
The buddha potential is just this. 
The sugata essence is just this. 
Because of tasting what is, 
It is also the great bliss. 
The understanding of Secret Mantra is just this. 
Means and knowledge is just this. 
The vast and profound is just this. 
Samantabhadra with consort is just this. 
This space and wisdom, perceiving while being empty, 
Is what is called 'knowing original enlightenment.' 
This self-knowing, while one is still defiled, 
Does not depend on other things, 
So self-existing wakefulness is just this. 
Being aware, it is cognizance. 
A natural knowing that is free of thought. 
This self-knowing cannot possibly form thoughts. 
Without conceptualizing a 'mind,' 
Since it is not something to be conceived, 
I2 
SoNGS oF NAROPA 
This original wakefulness, cognizant yet thought-free, 
Is like the wisdom of the Tathagata. 
Therefore, it is taught, "Realize that luminous mind 
Is the mind of original wakefulness, 
And don't seek an enlightenment separate from that." 
Nevertheless, this mind does become disturbed 
By the defilement of momentary thoughts. 
Like water, like gold, like the sky, 
It may be either pure or impure. 
But the naturally luminous mind 
Is free from even a hair-tip of concrete substance, 
Like the analogy of a sky flower. 
It does not exist as it seems to be, 
Therefore, it cannot be established to be nonexistent. 
As everything is mutually dependent, 
When one side is invalid, the other side also does not 
exist. 
Mind is neither existent nor nonexistent, 
Since each of these [constructs] is negated. 
It is also not both, 
Since existing and not existing are a contradiction. 
It is not a living being 
Nor other than living beings. 
Therefore, it is free from all constructs. 
This is how I have established the ultimate: 
"Mind is based on space," as it is said. 
This unconstructed self-knowing 
Perceives while empty, and while empty it perceives. 
IJ 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
Experience and emptiness are therefore indivisible, 
Like the analogy of the moon in water. 
This is how I have established nonduality: 
"Space is not based on anything," as it is said. 
This unconstructed self-knowing 
Is itself the very basis of samsara. 
Nirvana as well is also just this. 
The Great Middle Way is also just this. 
That to be seen is also just this. 
That to train in is also just this. 
That to attain is also just this. 
The valid truth is also just this. 
The renowned threefold tantras 
Ofbasic cause, method, and result, 
And what is known as ground, path, and fruition, 
Are just different situations of this. 
The basic consciousness, the all-ground, 
And all possible aggregates in samsara, 
Are known as the 'dependent,' and so forth. 
Emaho! 
The creations of this mind essence, while one is still 
defiled, 
The six classes ofbeings, and so forth, 
Extending to the bounds of space, 
Are the magical machinery of suffering, which surpasses 
the grasp of thought. 
This unconstructed self-knowing itself 
Which is free from the defilement of thought, 
Is the nondwelling nirvana. 
SONGS OF NAROPA 
The Vajra Being is also just this. 
The Sixth Buddha is also just this. 
The six families are also just this. 
Manjushri Kumara is just this. 
V airochana is just this. 
Dharmakaya, the great bliss, 
And the state of unity are also just this. 
This itself is the fourth empowerment. 
Innate joy is also just this. 
Natural purity is also just this. 
All these and other different indicators 
Known from the sutras and the tantras, 
Are for the most part based on this; 
Simply combined with this in whichever way is suitable. 
Emaho! 
The creations of this undefiled mind essence, 
What comprises the kayas of form: 
The buddhafields of utter purity, 
The magically created mandalas, and so forth -
All these creations of great wonder -
Appear, extending to the bounds of space. 
The non-Buddhist Tirthikas, 
In their ignorance of mind itself, 
Are submerged in an ocean of erroneous philosophy 
Involving a self, a supreme godhead, and the like. 
The schools ofBuddhism, such as the shravakas, 
The pratyekabuddhas, and the followers ofMind Only, 
Maintain the duality of perceiver and perceived, 
And conceptualize nonduality as being the true. 
IS 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
Moreover, they get caught in the web of concepts 
Such as whether the perceived is real or false. 
By not mistaking the view in this way, 
You attain enlightenment through the meditation 
training and conduct, 
That are in harmony with the real, 
Just like a well-trained race horse. 
Unless you are in harmony with the real view, 
Your meditation training and conduct will be mistaken 
And you will not attain fruition, 
Like a blind man without a guide. 
How can my conceptual mind, [limited in its 
perceptions] like a frog in a well, 
Discover the profundity by stirring up 
The ocean-like depth of the true meaning! 
May all learned masters forgive my errors! 
Through whatever goodness there is from writing this 
May the stain of delusion be fully cleared away 
In fortunate and worthy beings, 
And may the knowledge of realization grow forth! 
This completes The View, Concisely Put by N aropa. 
In the presence of the pandita J nana Siddhi, this was translated and 
corrected by the lotsawa Marpa Chokyi Lodro.+ 
r6 
1 
I AM VERY HAPPY FOR THIS OPPORTUNITY to teach the Dharma, and 
especially to explain two ofNaropa's songs of realization: the Song of 
Naropa and the Summary of Mahamudra. It is both important and 
necessary to study and reflect upon such extraordinary teachings on the 
view of Mahamudra. When put into practice these instructions are in­
credibly effective. However, please remember that together with a high 
view, it is the responsibility of each practitioner to maintain a accord­
ingly conscientious conduct. Be very careful about your behavior. 
Please don't profess to maintain a very high view and at the same time 
only pretend to have a 'high' way of behaving. You may certainly keep a 
high view, but be very careful about how you conduct yourselves. 
At the beginning of Dharma studies, traditionally the masters of the 
past would encourage students to form the resolve towards enlighten­
ment, to engender hodhichitta. This is not merely a custom. Requesting 
and receiving teachings with this attitude of a bodhisattva will defi­
nitely cause our training to become true Dharma practice. Without 
bodhichitta, our practice may of course still be spiritual, but it will not 
be nearly as effective as it could be. Therefore, please motivate yourself 
with the proper enlightened attitude. 
The attitude of bodhichitta encompasses both compassion and dis­
criminating knowledge. It involves forming the determination to attain 
I7 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
supreme enlightenment for the benefit of all beings. Just think: every 
single one of the infinite number of sentient beings, a multitude as 
infinite as the sky is vast, have all been our own mothers and fathers in 
past lives. Every single one of them wishes to be happy and avoid 
suffering. But in going through the different states of samsaric exis­
tence they suffer incredibly. They don't know how to avoid the causes 
of suffering; nor do they know how to produce the causes of happiness. 
In cultivating bodhichitta, we make up our minds to remove their 
suffering and establish them in a state of permanent happiness. At 
present, being ordinary sentient beings ourselves, we don't have the 
ability to eradicate the suffering of others. We are not able to give them 
protection or refuge, and we are unable to ensure their happiness. To 
remedy that, we should first study and reflect upon the sacred Dharma, 
then put it into practice, so that we will be able to bring immense 
benefit to all sentient beings. 
Thus, compassion is the attitude of wanting to understand and 
practice the Dharma as a necessary prerequisite to establishing each and 
every being in the state of complete enlightenment. Discriminating 
knowledge, prajfza, means to aim at accomplishing the lasting benefit 
of beings -their liberation from samsara and the attainment of the 
omniscient state of enlightenment. These states are not transitory, but 
permanent; thus they are of the highest value. In that kind of bodhi­
chitta, both compassion and discriminating knowledge are combined. 
This topic is very important, and I would like to expand upon it a 
little further. Ordinary beings in samsara have one single predominant 
thought: 'What is best for me?" The attitude of wanting to help others 
is neither well-developed nor vast. We as individuals are not unique in 
being somewhat selfish. Virtually all sentient beings are equally self­
seeking. We have wandered about in samsaric existence for such a long 
time that we have a deeply ingrained habit of treating ourselves as the 
most significant person in the world. We really aren't that concerned 
about the welfare of others. Paradoxically, however, considering oursel­
ves paramount has not been that comforting. We haven't attained 
IS 
SoNGS oF NAROPA 
infinite happiness with all our preferential self-treatment, have we? To 
complicate matters, not only are we not able to help ourselves and 
others -we actually slip into harming them. The habit of treasuring 
ourselves gives rise to all sorts of disturbing emotions. We feel at­
tached, angry, dull, proud, jealous ... the list is endless. All these nega­
tive emotions disturb our state of mind. They are expressed in actions 
that hurt others and make it even more difficult for ourselves. It's all so 
unpleasant, isn't it! 
The Buddha taught us how to deal with this selfish pattern. He ex­
plained that we should try our best to replace it with the attitude of 
bodhichitta. The frame of mind of a bodhisattva will also reduce dis­
turbing emotions by reducing the selfish attitude. It won't immediately 
uproot egotism -that is difficult to do in the beginning. However, 
cultivating relative bodhichitta will reduce excessive self-indulgence 
and disturbing emotions. Using relative bodhichitta as a basis, the 
Buddha imparted a method to totally eliminate the very root of selfish­
ness -namely, how to cultivate ultimate bodhichitta. Through prac­
ticing relative and ultimate bodhichitta, we are able to create the causes 
for bringing an end to suffering, and for benefiting both ourselves and 
others. 
Whether we are receiving teachings or trying to apply them, we may 
have the feeling that we can gain personally from this -an attitude of 
"this is for my sake." This is an ingrown habit, reinforced since begin­
ningless samsaric existence. It is necessary now to try to change that 
attitude. Of course these teachings will benefit us, but instead of being 
exclusively self-centered, think: "I will receive and put the teachings 
into practice for the benefit of all sentient beings." It's all right for that 
attitude to be a little artificial at present. Don't expect that it immedi­
ately will arise naturally. In the beginning we have to apply effort to 
change our normal habit into a broader, more altruistic frame of mind. 
So temporarily our compassionate attitude is artificial, a little contrived. 
But slowly, as we train and become more accustomed to thinking in a 
bodhisattva's way, this attitude becomes natural and spontaneous. 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
Every day we should try our best to form the resolve towards su­
preme enlightenment. Instead of continuing the tendency to think 
selfishly, endeavor to bring benefit to all beings. All the different prac­
tices start out with taking refuge and generating bodhichitta. There's a 
reason for this. Every time we apply a practice, we gradually shift our 
attitude. By doing this, we will eventually transform our nature into 
that of a bodhisattva. 
Please understand that ultimate bodhichitta is not a temporary shift 
in attitude. It is not an artificial fabrication of a frame of mind, but a 
permanent change. Ultimate bodhichitta cuts disturbing emotions at 
their very root. We need to train in ultimate as well as relative bodhi­
chitta. Ultimate bodhichitta is the very heart, the essence, of Buddhist 
practice. By beginning with relative bodhichitta, we are able to improve 
our minds and uplift our attitudes. Through ultimate bodhichitta we 
are able to thoroughly eliminate disturbing emotions. 
Acting out of great kindness, the Buddha revealed to us the way 
things truly are. He encouraged us to question our concept of ourselves. 
We begin to get glimpses of this basic state when we look for that 
thing we call 'I' and discover that there is no such entity to find. 'I' does 
not have any reality to it; it does not possess any real existence. 
We can come to this understanding through intellectual reasoning 
-we figure it out and become convinced. We can also reach this 
understanding through meditation practice. Whichever way we experi­
ence egolessness so that it becomes an actuality is fine. The bottom line 
is that we need to gain certainty about egolessness, then grow accus­
tomed to that truth through our training. 
It is not only the individual self that does not exist: all phenomena 
have no real existence. This is explained in the famous Heart Sutra, the 
Heart ofTranscendent Knowledge, in particular the line: "No eye, no ear, 
no nose, no tongue, no body, no mind ... " What this tells us is that no 
knowable things can be established to truly exist anywhere. 
In the Vajrayana context, the emphasis is placed on personal experi­
ence rather than intellectual reasoning. We are taught to look direcdy 
20 
SoNGS oF NAROPA 
into our mind to see whether it is some concrete entity that can be 
taken hold of, that can be identified. We begin by listening to descrip­
tions of how the nature of mind is. This gives us an idea through infer­
ence. Based on what we are told, we begin to comprehend that "This is 
probably how it is." We approach realization of the mind as devoid of 
any concrete self-nature. Then, when we personally look into our 
minds and recognize, we obtain direct experience. We finally know 
"This is how it really is!" Now we have a conviction about the true 
nature of mind. 
The sequence of methods is thus first, to discover the absence of the 
individual self, egolessness; next, to ascertain that all things are empti­
ness; and finally, to be introduced to the natural state of mind. The 
great masters of India and Tibet applied these exact methods to reach 
realization. 
Mistakes are inevitable when one begins Vajrayana practice. Here 
are two common ways of going wrong. The first one is called 'deluded 
meditation' -literally, 'the meditation of a fool.' This happens when 
we proceed without any clarity as to what we are supposed to train in. 
We may stubbornly and even diligently practice our own form of 
meditation, without knowing what needs to be transcended, and what 
experience and realization needs to be brought forth. We do it igno­
rantly, not knowing how, why or what; but simply persevering in our 
misconceptions of what practice is. Of course, such meditation practice 
won't produce any profound result. 
Another mistake is to pursue only the intellectual understanding of 
what meditation is. We read through many texts and listen to many 
teachings, and at some point we decide that we now possess a very dis­
tinct picture of what meditation practice is. This mental picture can 
become very clear; we can be thoroughly convinced. We may even be 
able to easily talk about it and explain meditation to others! We are 
pretending to understand, but we lack any actual personal experience. 
This is the mistaken path of an intellectual, whose words about medi­
tation practice are merely empty talk. Please try your best to avoid both 
21 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
of these mistakes: either involvement in deluded meditation or invol­
vement in platitudes. 
How did great masters like V airochana, Marpa, and Longchen 
Rabjam instruct others to avoid these two mistakes? They told their 
followers to begin by studying according to the Sutra tradition. They 
led them to understand the absence of the individual self and the emp­
tiness of all phenomena. Their students gained certainty in these 
essential aspects of reality, and only then engaged in the Vajrayana 
practices of the development and completion stages. finally, the master 
imparted real guidance in the meditation trainings of Mahamudra and 
Dzogchen. This type of training allows us to avoid the two mistakes 
discussed above. 
So, by studying and reflecting upon the Sutra teachings, we avoid 
falling into the trap of deluded meditation. And by undergoing genuine 
Vajrayana training, we avoid the trap of becoming a mere intellectual. 
These instructions, which have been personally practiced and taught by 
great masters through the centuries, are still available. The lineages and 
the realization for these teachings remain unbroken. At the present 
time there are masters who are learned as well as accomplished in the 
truth. 
Now, some people may argue it's possible for us to figure the ulti­
mate truth out for ourselves. We can read books and ponder the 
meaning; we can gain an intellectual understanding of how to practice. 
That may very well be true. But the profound nature of emptiness, the 
true natural state, is seldom the object of our thoughts. Indeed, it's not 
within the reach of ordinary thinking. For this reason it's extremely 
important to receive proper guidance and pith instructions in Maha­
mudra and Dzogchen from a living lineage master. 
There are many other extraordinary teachings in Vajrayana, includ­
ing the Six Doctrines ofNaropa and the instructions on how to train in 
darkness and daylight. All these teachings can be received from the 
great masters of our times. A receptive student can meet with a quali-
22 
SoNGS OF NAROPA 
fied master, achieve a correct understanding of practice, and gain cer­
tainty. Without this, we are bound to encounter difficulties in practice. 
Teachings like Mahamudra, also known as the path of liberation, as 
explained by N aropa in this book, have the complete, true view. A 
beginner can embark on this training in a very gentle and relaxed way. 
It is not necessary to grapple with too many difficulties. For present day 
students, I feel it is a very good idea to first study, then understand and 
finally put into practice a teaching like this. 
When beginning Dharma practice, some people experience tremen­
dous interest and devotion, to such an extent that it becomes difficult 
for them to continue their normal work and life. Wanting to engage in 
intensive practice, we may neglect our careers; while pursuing our 
careers, our practice is neglected. This can become a very frustrating 
situation! A teaching like Mahamudra, however, is something that we 
can practice while working. The solution for the apparent dilemma is 
simple: 'work some, practice some.' Doing this, there is no real contra­
diction between daily life and Dharma practice. 
A good example of this harmony between work and practice is pro­
vided by the lives of the Eighty-four Mahasiddhas of India. Look at 
tangkas of them and read their life stories. One was a weaver; another a 
farmer; Tilopa is depicted as grinding sesame seeds. Then of course 
there was Nagarjuna, who was an incredibly great scholar, and Indra­
bodhi, a powerful king. So you see it doesn't matter whether you have a 
significant or trivial job; whether you are an important person or a no­
body in society. These masters exemplify the possibility of training and 
attaining accomplishment in Mahamudra in any walk of life. They 
show how it is possible to practice and work at the same time. 
Mahamudra is incredibly beneficial for anybody's mind. It always 
has been, of course, but this is especially true in modern times. In the 
past, people seemed to have had more perseverance, like Milarepa, and 
applied themselves whole-heartedly to practice. Due to better circum­
stances, you could be a full-time practitioner and not worry about sur­
vival. Nowadays things are not like that. Practically speaking, we 
23 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
cannot abandon everything and say "Now I only want to practice." It 
doesn't help if the teacher says "Now give up everything, forsake the 
world and focus one-pointedly on meditation." It is just not practical. 
We need to be responsible for our own living situation. On the other 
hand, it certainly doesn't help to think 'Well, times have changed, I 
can't practice like they did in the old days." To attain accomplishment 
we have to practice and personally apply the teachings. Given the 
constraints of modern life, I feel that Mahamudra is a very convenient 
and suitable practice, one that is always applicable. 
Mahamudra is the type of teaching we can keep in mind in our daily 
lives. Whenever we have a free moment we can think about the mean­
ing ofNaropa's words, paying attention to and bringing those profound 
teachings into our lives. Being mindful and attentive and applying the 
teachings whenever we have the opportunity will definitely be of great 
benefit. 
The View Concisely Put and the Summary of Mahamudra are very 
succinct texts which explain the view, meditation, conduct and fruition 
of Mahamudra in simple terms. They don't cover much beyond that: 
we don't find details on how to sit, for example, or how to place our 
attention while meditating, because these are not necessary for the 
advanced practitioner. However, this is not so for a beginner. Someone 
new to Mahamudra cannot simply jump into the text abruptly. There­
fore, first I will briefly discuss physical posture to be used when practic­
ing Mahamudra. 
When teaching Mahamudra, our basic state, usually called the na­
ture of mind, is pointed out and is supposed to be recognized. The 
nature of mind, the nature of Mahamudra, may be recognized, or it 
may not. Sometimes the student is not so clear or confident about rec­
ognizing. Sometimes even though the student may have recognized the 
nature of mind, he or she is still overcome by disturbing emotions. 
Perhaps these disturbing emotions don't subside to the extent they 
should; or perhaps we still get carried away in one way or another. 
Whatever the particular problem may be, the qualities of wakefulness 
24 
SoNGs oF NAROPA 
don't seem to increase. Even though the vipashyana aspect, the insight, 
may be all right in itself, to support or to stabilize it we need shamatha. 
If our minds are stabilized by shamatha, our practice of Mahamudra 
will also be stable. In practicing shamatha, posture is very helpful in 
obtaining calmness and steadiness of mind. 
The posture used here is called the 'seven-fold posture of Vairo­
chana.' The literal meaning of the name V airochana is 'manifest clar­
ity.' By applying the seven points of posture, clarity is brought forth in 
one's experience. The first point is the cross-legged vajra position. Sit­
ting in the full vajra posture for someone unaccustomed to it can be 
painful, however, and this can make meditation practice difficult. If this 
is the case, it's sufficient to sit in the ordinary cross-legged position. 
The instruction specifies one should sit, not stand up or lie down. The 
reason for sitting is if we stand up or lie down it's harder to be stable­
minded. Our attention is more easily distracted, or we may fall asleep. 
The second point is to keep a straight back. The backbone is the 
center of the body; so if it is kept straight, we can be sure the body is in 
alignment. Inside our body are subtle channels. When the body is 
straight, these channels are aligned and the energy currents circulate 
freely inside them. Our normal state of mind is influenced or literally 
supported by these energy currents. When the flow of energy is free 
and unhindered, our state of mind is at ease. We feel calm and stable 
which is good for practice. 
Third, place your hands in the posture of equanimity or composure. 
Generally this means to put the right hand on top of the left and rest 
them both palm-side up in your lap. Another way to explain this is that 
you should arrange your hands in a balanced way -don't place one 
hand on the ground and the other on your lap. It is also acceptable to 
rest the hands palm up on the knees. 
The fourth point is to hold the elbows straight. They should be 
neither rigid nor bent. Once again, we are maintaining balance with 
the arms. The fourth point is sometimes described as 'keeping your 
arms like a vulture.' 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
Point five is to bend your neck slightly. Do not let the head hang 
down, which squeezes the throat. The head should not lean backwards 
either, as this makes it difficult to be at ease. To bend the head or the 
neck slightly forward creates the support for keeping correct attention. 
Sixth, lightly touch the tongue to the palate. This reduces the flow 
of saliva, which means we don't have to deal with thoughts about 
whether we should swallow or not. 
The seventh point is to leave your gaze in mid-air, in the direction 
of your nose. Occasionally this is misunderstood. Some people think 
they have to stare into mid-air and try to see space in front of them­
selves. This is obviously very hard! They think, "I have to see some­
thing. How can one simply look at space? I usually only look at things, 
and fix my mind on them. This looking at nothing seems really diffi­
cult. What should I actually do?" Thinking like this is not necessary. 
We don't have to sit and look at something. To leave your gaze in mid­
air in the direction of the nose simply means to not look at anything in 
particular. When our attention is not occupied with any visual object, 
our mind is more free to look into itsel£ Remember, the real goal here 
is for the attention to look into itself. We don't have to sit and stare 
into the space in front of us. Some people do this so rigidly that their 
eyes get irritated and water! That is not necessary. It's more important 
to suspend the focus; to not hold a focus on any visual object.+ 
z6 
2 
IN PAST YEARS I HAVE TAUGHT OTHER TEXTS on Mahamudra: 
Moonlight of Mahamudra by Dakpo Tashi Namgyal, Pointing 
Directly at Dharmakaya by the Ninth Karmapa Wangchuk Dorje, and 
River Ganges of Mahamudra, the Gangama, by Tilopa. This year's text 
is The View, Concisely Put by Naropa. It is a song about the view, which 
is a truly extraordinary teaching. 
You may already be familiar with 
the life story ofNaropa; but I will 
summarize it shortly. Naropa was born as the son of a king. Growing 
up, however, he had no inclination to become the ruler of a country. 
Instead he renounced his kingdom and took ordination as a monk. He 
studied and became extremely learned. Later, he stayed at the great 
monastic university of Nalanda in eastern India. It was the custom of 
that time to appoint panditas or great scholars to safeguard the Dharma 
at the four gates of the monastery in the four directions- north, south, 
east, and west -with an additional one in the center. After a certain 
master passed away, Naropa replaced him at the northern gate. 
Naropa received blessings from Vajra Yogini, possibly due to some 
past karmic connection with her. The opening line in the song says, 
"Homage to the Vajra Dakini!" This refers to Vajra Y ogini, about 
whom there is the following story. One day Naropa was sitting outside 
the temple reading a scripture. Suddenly a shadow fell upon the page. 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
He looked up and saw a very old woman standing before him. She 
asked him, 'What you are reading? Tell me, is it the words you under­
stand, or do you understand the meaning?" 
Naropa answered, "It's the words I understand. I am learned in the 
words." When the old woman heard this she was overjoyed. She smiled 
and laughed; she danced around; she clapped her hands and sang. As 
she showed such great delight and carried on so jubilantly, Naropa 
wondered, 'Why is she so happy to hear that I know the words? 
'Knowing the words' simply means to be clear about the idea through 
intellectual reasoning." He then thought: "If that is the case, she will be 
even more happy when I say that I know the meaning." 
So Naropa then told her, "I understand not only the words but also 
the meaning." Her reaction was exactly the opposite. She stopped 
smiling. She stopped dancing. She looked incredibly sad, and created 
quite a scene by crying and wailing. He of course wondered, 'Why 
would she be really happy when I say, 'I understand the words,' but 
miserable when I say, 'I understand the meaning'?" N aropa asked her 
'Why are you acting like that?" 
The old lady replied, "Y au say that you understand the words, and 
that is true. You are a learned pandita who guards the northern gate to 
Nalanda. But when you say that you understand the meaning, that is 
not true; you are lying. It made me very sad. Y au have not yet achieved 
the totality of experience and realization. That is why I appeared 
upset." 
N aropa asked, 'What can I do to understand the meaning? Who is 
learned in the meaning?" The old lady replied, "find my brother Tilopa. 
If you meet him, you will be able to understand the meaning as well." 
Merely hearing Tilopa's name, Naropa was overjoyed. From the core of 
his heart he experienced a strong conviction that "I must meet him!" 
He prayed fervently to be able to do so, and then began the sadhana of 
Hevajra. While he was practicing, a voice from the sky said, "In order 
to meet Tilopa, it is better if you practice the Chakrasamvara sadhana." 
So he did that, reciting the mantra of Chakrasamvara seven hundred 
28 
SoNGS OF NAROPA 
thousand times. Mter this he received another prediction that indicated 
he would be able to meet Tilopa if he journeyed to the east. 
Naropa underwent twelve minor and twelve major trials in search of 
this master, but due to his pride he missed several opportunities to 
meet Tilopa. For instance, during his journey he encountered several 
deformed or disgusting beggars. Naropa behaved quite arrogantly 
towards them, and after he passed by they would say, "If you behave 
like that you will never meet Tilopa." The beggar would then instantly 
disappear, and Naropa would realize that they were emanations of 
Tilopa. Another time a beggar stood in the middle of the road blocking 
his way. Naropa asked him to please move so he could get by. He 
retorted, "I'm not moving. You can either walk around me or you can 
jump over me, whichever you please. But there is no way I'm going to 
move from this spot." Naropa proceeded to jump over him. The beggar 
said, "If you are that arrogant, you will never meet Tilopa." Once again, 
the man vanished into 
mid-air and Naropa was left behind feeling deep 
regret. 
On another occasion Naropa heard that Tilopa would go begging 
for alms that day. He thought, "lfl go to the nearest temple, where the 
beggars usually line up, I will probably meet Tilopa." When he arrived 
he asked if anyone knew the mahasiddha Tilopa. They answered, 'We 
don't know the mahasiddha Tilopa who you are looking for, but there's 
one beggar by the name of Tilopa around here somewhere." When he 
first met this beggar, Naropa bowed respectfully to him, walked around 
him and requested teachings. Putting his hand inside his shirt, the 
beggar brought out a clump of lice, and said, "Throw these in the fire." 
Naropa thought, 
"I'm a monk! I'm a pure Buddhist! I can't do anything 
like that. It would be terrible if I were to kill sentient beings." Being 
attached to his self-image, he couldn't do what the beggar said. The 
beggar then snapped, "If you have that kind of attachment, you will 
never meet Tilopa." And again he vanished. 
At the end of his twelve minor trials, Naropa was at the brink of 
complete despair. He thought, "I will never meet Tilopa. There is 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
nothing I can do. I just don't have the fortune, so I might as well kill 
myself." He took a knife and was about to cut his throat. Suddenly he 
heard a voice saying, "If you do that, it is of no benefit, even if you 
meet Tilopa." He looked around, and Tilopa was standing right there. 
At last they had met. Those were the twelve minor trials of Naropa. 
Later, I will explain the twelve major ones. 
In Sanskrit: Adhi Siddhi Sama Nama 
In Tibetan: Ita ba mdor bsdus pa zhes bya ba 
In English: The View, Concisely Put 
The text I am about to explain opens with the Sanskrit title and 
follows with the corresponding title in Tibetan, which is Tawa 
Dordiipa, or The View, Concisely Put. In Mahamudra there are four 
aspects: view, meditation training, conduct and fruition. This teaching 
is about the view. While it is possible to explain the view in great 
detail, that is not the case here. This song is a condensed explanation of 
the view; hence, "concisely put." 
Homage to the Vajra Dakini! 
There is a direct connection between Mahamudra and V ajra Y ogini, 
who is Naropa's personal deity or yidam. In the Sutra system this deity, 
as the female buddha Prajnaparamita, symbolizes the mother of all 
buddhas and bodhisattvas. Prajnaparamita, transcendent knowledge, is 
the innate natural state. The realization of this gives birth to the frui­
tion of the path of shravakas, pratyekabuddhas, bodhisattvas, and the 
complete enlightenment of the buddhas. This realization, being the 
mother or source of all awakened ones, is depicted in the form of a 
female. Ordinarily the natural state is called Chagya Chenpo, Maha­
mudra, but sometimes it is called Chagya Chenmo, in which the 'mo' at 
the end is a female derivative. The connotation is that which gives 
birth, the mother or source of realization. 
Paying homage is a gesture of respect and devotion. Out of sincere 
interest, appreciation and delight we are able to understand and realize 
30 
SoNGs OF NAROPA 
the nature of what it is we respect. Paying homage towards that which 
represents the state of Mahamudra with openness, pure respect, devo­
tion and appreciation acts as a conduit to being able to experience and 
realize Mahamudra. That is the meaning of the line, "Homage to the 
Vajra Dakini!". 
To the omniscient lord of refuge, 
The protector ofbeings, I pay homage! 
Next is an homage to the Buddha. There is a particular reason to 
pay homage to the Buddha at this point. In ancient India certain 
teachings predominated in different periods: first the shravaka teach­
ings were eminent; then the Mahayana teachings became widespread; 
later the V ajrayana teachings prevailed. This has caused certain scholars 
to make conclusions concerning the importance of the different teach­
ings. For instance, some declare that the shravaka teachings, now 
embodied in the Theravada tradition, are the authentic teachings of the 
Buddha. They don't consider Mahayana and Vajrayana to be the Bud­
dha's teachings. Other scholars have determined that most shravaka 
teachings and Mahayana teachings are the authentic words of the Bud­
dha, whereas the V ajrayana is not. In order to alleviate any doubt or 
hesitation people may have in studying a teaching like this, Naropa put 
in "Homage to the Buddha" at the very beginning. He wanted to show 
that the Mahamudra view is in complete harmony with the words of 
the Buddha. 
The three main qualities of the Buddha are knowledge, compassion 
and capability. When paying homage to the Buddha the great master 
Naropa starts out, "To the omniscient ... " 'Omniscient' here refers to 
the characteristic of perfect knowledge. This perfect knowledge sees 
the nature of all things as they are and perceives all that can possibly 
exist. In addition to perfect knowledge, kindness is needed. If the 
kindness that is directed towards helping other beings is missing, a 
person's wisdom doesn't help anybody else. Compassion is equally im­
portant. This is illustrated by the term "lord of refuge," meaning the 
31 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
one who safeguards or acts for the welfare of others. In doing so he 
wants to protect, guard, or give refuge to all beings. 
It's not enough merely to want to help others. One has to have the 
ability to do it as well. The third quality of an awakened one is theca­
pability that is expressed in the words "the protector of beings." Those 
who possess these three qualities are the ones who truly protect and act 
for the welfare of all sentient beings. 
Mter pursuing statements and reasoning 
I have condensed and established the true meaning. 
The next two lines contain the traditional declaration of intention 
to make this composition. 'Statements' refers to both the words of the 
Buddha and the teachings given by all noble beings. Naropa's under­
standing is in accordance with what enlightened beings have taught. 
He is indicating that his teaching is not something invented by him­
sel£ It is in full harmony with the words of the Buddha and with the 
statements of enlightened beings. Moreover, this is not simply an ex­
ercise in blind faith: Naropa thoroughly investigated the meaning of 
what was said, intelligently analyzing it and presenting it in a manner 
that is logical and reasonable. With regard to both statements and rea­
soning, N aropa is saying, "I have condensed and established the true 
meaning." He offers this in a clear, short, direct way. 
Generally speaking, the system ofMahamudra points out the nature 
of mind itself. The disciple with sincere interest and devotion who is 
confident in the recognition will then practice it diligently. However, 
unless something is reasonable, it is hard to have true interest and ap­
preciation regarding it. Making sense is dependent upon intelligent 
analysis. What we understand should be in accordance with the state­
ments of the awakened ones -their teachings. So, "After pursuing 
statements and reasoning" also refers to the student. 
In Mahamudra there are often four steps. The first is showing that 
the perceived -meaning what we experience -is mind. Next is the 
realization that mind is empty. Third is the understanding that this 
32 
SoNGS OF NAROPA 
emptiness is spontaneously present; and fourth, the knowledge that this 
spontaneous presence is self-liberated. This is called the 'four-fold 
pointing-out instruction.' The starting point is to show that what is 
experienced, what we perceive, is actually mind. This is contrary to our 
normal attitude that what we experience is outside and apart from our­
selves. When what we experience is pleasant, we are attracted. If it is 
unpleasant, we are repulsed. We feel attachment and desire towards 
something that is attractive, and aversion and anger towards disgusting 
objects or people. Through this attachment and aversion we create 
negative karma. 
To counteract this pattern, the Mahamudra teachings first introduce 
us to the fact that the perceived -that which seems to be outside and 
external to ourselves -is actually created by the perceiving mind. 
Perceptions are mentally created, like a dream. The inner, perceiving 
mind is empty. Understanding this naturally reduces the clinging and 
attraction. When clinging and attraction lessen, liking and disliking 
also weaken. When likes and dislikes decrease, joy and sorrow dimin­
ish. When joy and sorrow diminish, aversion and attachment naturally 
fall away. That is the purpose of the first instruction in Mahamudra. 
All these apparent and existing phenomena 
Are nowhere apart from mind, your own awareness. 
Since it perceives and is cognizant, 
It is like experience that is self-known. 
Let's look at the first line. 'Apparent' refers to the objects of the five 
senses; all that is perceived. 'Existing' refers to the perceiving mind 
within, that which apprehends and perceives phenomena. 'All phe­
nomena' means anything that can possibly exist. We should understand 
that whatever takes place, all phenomena, are not really outside us, but 
are actually inside our minds. In other words, nothing exists apart frorrl 
our mind. There are four schools of Buddhist philosophy, the Vaibha­
shika, the Sautrantika, the Chittamatra or Mind Only, and the 
Madhyamika or Middle Way. This song sounds very much like the 
33 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
Mind Only philosophy, which established that whatever is experienced 
is mind. The great master Dharmakirti presented a proof through 
which we can establish that all phenomena are actually mind. The 
proof is that no thing is separate from the mind which experiences it. It 
cannot be demonstrated or conceived that any possible thing exists 
apart from being experienced by a mind. All sights, all visible forms, 
are never separate from visual cognition, the seeing that takes place 
through our eyes. Audible sounds do not take place anywhere apart 
from sound cognition or hearing. Similarly, all memories and thought 
forms do not take place separate from mental cognition, the mind 
consciousness. The text here says, "Since it perceives and is cogni­
zant ... " That means that no phenomena is separate from that percep­
tion or cognizance. 
Emotions and thoughts are what we feel and think. We experience 
them, and when we do it is none other than our mind that experiences. 
When we perceive something as being outside of ourselves, as an exter­
nal object, it is actually we ourselves who have externalized the content 
of our experiences. Everything is in truth our own experience. 
Experiencing is exactly what mind does, as pointed out by the line 
that says, "Since it perceives and is cognizant". The next line provides 
an example of this when it says, "It is like experience that is self­
known." We know when we experience, because we possess the abilities 
of perception and cognizance. If what was experienced was not already 
mind, there could be no link between external things and mind. If what 
we encountered was separate from and outside the mind, it would be 
impossible to experience it. The inescapable conclusion is thus that 
whatever is perceived is mind. 
If this mind was not like that 
There would be no link and therefore no experience. 
This is how I have established the relative: 
"Understand that all phenomena 
are based on mind," as 
it is said. 
34 
SoNGS OF NAROPA 
External phenomena, inner phenomena, the perceiver and perceived 
-all are within the mind. Mahamudra practitioners don't spend too 
much time analyzing the emptiness of external phenomena. Rather, the 
practitioner is directly introduced to the natural state, the nature of his 
or her mind. That all things, whatever is experienced, is mind can be 
established either through reasoning or through meditation training. In 
this teaching I have presented the general intellectual idea, so that you 
can become convinced that it is reasonably so. Once you understand 
the point, you will have the trust necessary to begin training so that you 
can fully realize that this is so. 
According to the Sutra system of Buddhism, to arrive at complete 
enlightenment we need to perfect the accumulation of merit for either 
three or seven incalculable eons. According to the extraordinary teach­
ings of Vajrayana, it is possible to arrive at the unified level of a vajra 
holder in this same body and lifetime. Which .is true? Both are! The 
difference lies in whether or not the practitioner is introduced to the 
very heart of the training, the natural state of mind. After being intro­
duced to the natural state we can, by means of fully training in it, gain 
complete enlightenment in this very lifetime. If we do not engage in 
this training and instead focus on outer objects in a way that is merito­
rious or virtuous, enlightenment will take three incalculable eons. The 
determining factor is whether or not the nature of mind has been 
pointed out, and whether or not one has recognized it. 
It's interesting to note that the accomplished great masters of Tibet 
had a slightly different approach to study and practice. When studying 
the Dharma, they would place more emphasis on examining the Sutra 
system of Madhyamika, Abhidharma, the Prajnaparamita and so forth. 
But when engaging in meditation training, however, they would focus 
on the vajra vehicle of Secret Mantra, V ajrayana. 
Within Vajrayana itself there are many different ways of training, 
such as the development stage of visualizing deities and mandalas, 
reciting mantras and so forth. However, the key to attaining true and 
complete enlightenment in one lifetime lies in being introduced to, 
35 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
recognizing and training in the natural state of mind. All the great 
siddhas attained accomplishment based on this. 
Through Madhyamika we can establish how all phenomena are 
devoid of true existence, of any self-entity. It is a very convenient, very 
practical approach through which we can intellectually understand that 
all things are emptiness. When it comes to actually experiencing this 
emptiness for ourselves, however, the Madhyamika system seems to be 
a very roundabout method. Personal application involves looking into 
our own mind. The practice of the accomplished masters of India and 
Tibet was not to look outward by analyzing external phenomena, but 
rather to look into that which thinks -our own mind. In the moment 
of looking towards the thinker, you don't have to really establish emp­
tiness or articulate any particular philosophical position. In the very 
moment of looking into that which thinks, it is seen as already empty, 
all by itself. The emptiness doesn't have to be proven in any way 
whatsoever. This very direct approach is the tradition of the siddhas, 
and it starts with looking into the nature of mind. 
Now I have covered the first point: that everything you perceive, all 
appearances, are mind. Next I will discuss the second point: that mind 
is empty.+ 
3 
YOU ALWAYS HEAR THE BUDDHIST TEACHERS say that we should 
study the Dharma with a pure motivation. Being ordinary people, 
it does happen sometimes that we don't exactly have pure motivation. 
The definition of an ordinary person is someone who doesn't have pure 
motivation. Let's check ourselves every so often: "Exactly what is my 
motivation for studying these teachings?" If we find that our motiva­
tion is selfish, we should gradually try to change that into having a pure 
motivation. On the other hand if we already have a pure motivation, it 
may be that it is not so expansive, yet. It may be limited to only our 
group. We should try to our best to gradually enlarge it and make our 
unselfish motivation all-encompassing. That kind of training is very 
beneficial. Training now in having pure motivation, will help in the 
future. Then the true and authentic awakened attitude of bodhichitta 
will come quite naturally. 
To continue the story of Naropa, the author of this text, I already 
covered the twelve minor trials he underwent while searching for 
Tilopa. Mter meeting Tilopa he underwent even more hardship. I will 
continue by telling how he received the ripening empowerments and 
the liberating instructions. 
When bestowing the ripening empowerments, Tilopa showed 
Naropa twelve symbolic signs. Tilopa would show Naropa one gesture 
37 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
or one sign at a time. After Naropa again begged him to teach more, he 
would show one more sign, but without any explanation. finally, having 
shown Naropa twelve different gestures of symbolic meaning, Tilopa 
sang a song in which he explained the meaning of these twelve signs. 
The first sign Tilopa showed Naropa was a piece of cloth that he set 
on fire. After it burned and turned to ashes, the cloth looked exactly 
like the same as before, in that it still maintained its original shape. As 
Tilopa explained later in the song, our disturbing emotions are like the 
cloth, and the oral instruction of a qualified master is like the fire that 
burns the cloth. The training in the pith instructions sets our disturb­
ing emotions on fire and burns them to cinders. What we finally end 
up with in our minds is something that resembles disturbing emotions, 
but which doesn't really have the fiber or texture of genuine disturbing 
emotions. Although we appear to be an ordinary human being, our 
nature, the continuum of buddha nature, is originally pure and clear, 
like a crystal ball. 
For the next instruction Tilopa tied a knot in a piece of rope and 
told Naropa to untie it. Our attachment to the aims and entanglement 
within the struggles of this life are like a knot tied in a rope, which 
needs to be released. Next, Tilopa placed a jewel on the crown of 
Naropa's head. This means that although our stream ofbeing is origi­
nally and utterly pure, we are fettered by temporary mistaken, impure 
perceptions that need to be released. In order to do so, we need to de­
pend on a qualified master who is like a precious jewel to be revered at 
the crown of our head. In the next symbolic sign, Tilopa merely looked 
at the jewel very carefully for a long time. The implication here is that 
once you meet a qualified master, you should follow him very mindfully 
and attentively for a long time. 
Then Tilopa took out a large basin and filled it with water. He 
ordered Naropa to drink all of it, which Naropa succeeded in doing. 
The meaning here is having connected with a qualified master, you 
need to absorb or assimilate all the pith instructions in their entirety. 
After N aropa begged repeatedly for the next instruction, Tilopa simply 
SoNGs oF NAROPA 
showed a design known as the 'source of dharmas.' This showed that 
all phenomena have never come into being; they are non-arising. 
When Naropa again supplicated Tilopa to instruct him, he showed 
him a circle. The meaning of that is once you realize that phenomena 
are empty, the nature of emptiness is the unchanging single sphere of 
dharmakaya. Then Tilopa pointed his finger towards his own heart, 
meaning that the single sphere of dharmakaya is not somewhere else; it 
is in oneself. Next, Tilopa tied a knot in a snake and placed it in front 
of Naropa. Without doing anything to the snake the knot was untied 
by itself. The meaning of this is that once we realize the natural state, 
samsara doesn't have to be unraveled -it is liberated by itself. When 
Naropa requested Tilopa to give the next instruction, Tilopa simply 
remained silent like a mute, not uttering a single word. This signified 
that the ultimate pith instruction is too profound to be expressed in 
words. It is inexpressible; we need to experience it ourselves. When 
requested again, Tilopa showed a piece of fruit, his way of symbolically 
indicating, "if you train in this instruction that I have given you, you 
will accomplish an excellent result." Lastly, Tilopa sang a song explain­
ing the meaning of all twelve symbolic indications. He concluded by 
telling Naropa: ''You have understood all these signs correctly. Your 
nature has been ripened, and you are now qualified to receive the pith 
instructions." 
This was from the life story; now, back to the song. I have described 
how all phenomena, whatever is experienced, is mind. I will start on 
the next point; that this mind is empty. 
The very basis of phenomena, which is mind essence, 
Can be analyzed, dissected with reasoning, and so forth, 
But this naturally luminous mind 
And the momentary defilement of thought, these two, 
Whether or not they are one or different 
Is a topic of extreme profundity. 
39 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
'Basis' means that the root or the basic nature of all phenomena is 
mind. When we scrutinize this mind, we discover that it is empty. In 
the general system of the Dharma there are two approaches to this end. 
One is to take inference as path: the student tries to deduce how the 
mind is by analyzing through reason. He asks, "Does the mind come 
from anywhere? Does mind remain anywhere? When it disappears, 
where does it disappear to?" Through such intellectual deduction, we 
can gain an understanding of how the mind is, and will eventually 
come to the conclusion that mind is empty. The 'but' which starts the 
third line means that although we can analyze and arrive at the conclu­
sion that mind is empty, we can also use the approach of direct percep­
tion, and simply see in actuality that mind is empty. 
The analytical approach proceeds step by step. first we scrutinize 
this thinking mind, how it is and what it looks like. We have a vague 
feeling that mind is something very strong, powerful, and solid. We 
determine it to be an entity that concretely exists, somewhere. We 
haven't looked for it, though, so we don't really know. Somehow it 
must be there. Later, we receive instructions on looking for our mind. 
We search for it and try to define what it looks like, but we fail to find 
a concrete thing that has a particular shape, color, or form. Did we fail 
because we didn't know how to look? Or is it because somehow we 
made a mistake, missed the point and weren't able to find this mind? 
Neither case applies. It is simply because mind is not a real "thing" that 
can be seen in any concrete or material way. 
So, inference can be used to examine external things. Reasoning 
intellectually in this way, we conclude that all things are empty. How­
ever, when it comes to looking into our own mind to find out how it is, 
it is not necessary to deduce or infer. We can also see directly, in actu­
ality, that our mind is empty. The third Karmapa, Rangjung Dorje, 
expressed this in a song, declaring, ''You cannot say that mind exists, 
because even the buddhas do not see it." Mind is not a concrete thing 
that even a buddha can find as something to behold. 
40 
SoNGs OF NAROPA 
Mind is empty, but does this mean it is a complete nothing? No, it 
is not. Let's continue with the text. "But this naturally luminous mind 
and the momentary defilement of thought, these two ... " What these 
lines mean is that mind is empty of any entity whatsoever. Yet although 
the essence is empty, at the same time it is not utterly non-existent. It 
is not comparable to a physical void or vacant space. Mind is not like 
the horns on the head of a rabbit-a traditional Tibetan example for 
something that doesn't exist at all. There is a luminous or cognizant 
capacity to mind which is naturally present. Even though mind is not a 
concrete entity, still there exists an unobstructed ability to cognize, to 
experience. That is why the third Karmapa continued, "It is also not 
non-existent, because it is the basis for samsara and nirvana." This 
cognizant quality of the empty mind is the very basis that makes possi­
ble the existence of samsara. It is also the basis for the possibility of 
attaining nirvana. 
By this point, we may well comprehend that mind is empty of any 
tangible entity and yet is naturally cognizant. The next question that 
arises is: Why do we have thoughts? Some are good thoughts, loving 
and compassionate, full of devotion and sincere appreciation. We also 
have bad thoughts -attachment, anger, jealousy, pride, dullness and 
so forth. Whichever is the case, whether the thoughts or emotions we 
experience are positive or negative, they are all only momentary. They 
appear suddenly and vanish just as quickly because they have no sub­
stance, they don't last in any permanent way. 
We hear that the nature of mind is luminous, clear light, meaning 
that it possesses the ability to cognize. We also hear that we obscure 
our own nature by involvement with thoughts -that we somehow 
fool ourselves or distract ourselves from our essential nature with 
momentary thoughts. Now, here is the next important question: Is this 
luminous nature the same as or different from the momentary defile­
ment of thought involvement? If our nature is essentially empty and 
cognizant, and we are continuously fooled by our own thinking, how 
does this thinking equate with the natural luminosity? 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
You cannot claim that the thinking is a separate entity, because it is 
impossible for any thought to occur apart from the natural luminosity. 
On the other hand, you cannot say that this luminous nature is identi­
cal with the defilement of momentary thinking, because they are re­
lated to one another in a causal fashion. The innate luminosity 
becomes obscured by the defilement of momentary thinking. Hence 
the next line, 'Whether or not they are one or different." 
Because of this depth, scholars analyze. 
Though they explain, I shall not write about it here. 
This is an incredibly profound point. Everything stands or falls with 
this point: Do we know the very identity of momentary thoughts to be 
the empty and luminously cognizant mind, or not? That is what makes 
the entire difference. If we know that the nature of any momentary 
thought or emotion is empty cognizance, we are no longer fooled by it. 
Because this is so crucial, scholars investigate and analyze this in great 
detail, carefully elucidating upon it, quoting from scriptures, and using 
intelligent reasoning, proofs and counter-proofs. It doesn't seem that 
Naropa deemed it necessary to write about all these details, however. 
His main concern is for us to truly experience the nature of mind, not 
simply talk about it. 
This mind that knows emptiness 
Is itself the awakened mind, bodhichitta. 
When mind knows this emptiness, its natural state, that itself is 
hodhichitta, awakened mind. Normally the word bodhichitta is explain­
ed as the resolve towards true and complete enlightenment: "I will 
attain enlightenment for all beings." That extraordinary and special 
frame of mind which is compassionate, loving and has tremendous 
fortitude is called conventional bodhichitta. There is also ultimate 
bodhichitta, which I briefly touched upon earlier. The hodhi in bodhi­
chitta means enlightenment. The Tibetan equivalent, jangchuh, refers 
to the state of an awakened one which is the perfection of both aban-
42 
SoNes OF NAROPA 
donment and realization. That kind of awakened state of mind in itself 
is ultimate bodhichitta. This is the meaning here. 
The buddha potential is just this. 
The sugata essence is just this. 
It is important first to comprehend exactly how the natural state of 
mind is. After comprehension comes meditation, which means to train 
in experiencing the natural state of mind. By doing this, we will even­
tually fully realize it. We all have the potential for the realization of 
enlightenment, which is called 'buddha potential'. 
People are of different types. Certain people, very pure types, are 
hardly obscured at all. Then there are those who are somewhat ob­
scured by disturbing emotions, and those who are incredibly obscured. 
No matter which type we are, we all have the possibility for under­
standing and realizing buddhahood if we train in the nature of mind. 
Furthermore, our nature of mind doesn't differ in quality. The Uttara­
tantri calls our nature of mind 'sugata essence' and 'buddha nature.' 
This buddha nature is the nature of every sentient being's mind. It is 
our original basic state that is empty of any entity whatsoever, yet at the 
same time is naturally cognizant. This empty cognizance has never and 
will never change. It doesn't increase or decrease in quality or size in 
any way. It is the unchanging, original basic nature of our minds. 
Because of tasting what is, 
It is also the great bliss. 
This empty cognizance is something that we can 'taste' -that is, 
experience exactly as it is -in meditation practice or in samadhi. 
When tasting what is exactly as it is, this originally empty and naturally 
cognizant essence at that moment cannot be harmed or disturbed by 
any external enemy, be it an evil spirit, a disease, or any other kind of 
impairment. The buddha nature is invincible. It cannot be destroyed or 
1 • Thrangu Rinpoche gives a lengthy explanation of the Uttaratantra in his 
Buddha Nature (Rangjung Yeshe Publ.). 
43 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
lost; indeed, nothing can destroy this innate empty cognizance. The 
knowledge of this essence is thus accompanied by a fearlessness that is 
totally free from the threat of suffering in any form whatsoever. This 
state of being free of all dread, free of all worry, free of all pain is 
therefore called 'great bliss.' 
The understanding of Secret Mantra is just this. 
'Secret Mantra' is a synonym for Vajrayana. There are many differ­
ent skillful means for V ajrayana practices, in terms of visualizing the 
forms of deities and mandalas, training in controlling the channels, the 
energies and essences, and so forth. These skillful means are all utilized 
to realize the main point of Vajrayana, which is the view of Maha­
mudra. Therefore, "Understanding of Secret Mantra is just this." 
Means and knowledge is just this. 
In V ajrayana there are the two aspects of means and knowledge, 
prajfia and upaya. Prajiia, meaning insight and knowledge, is consid­
ered to be of primary importance. The means -here implying 'skillful 
means' -is what is used to bring about this knowledge. Sometimes it 
is said that practicing development stage and visualizing a male form 
emphasizes skillful means, while visualizing the deity in a female form 
puts more emphasis on the knowledge aspect. Other times the devel­
opment stage is described as the aspect of skillful means, while the 
completion stage is equated with the knowledge aspect. There are 
many ways of describing means and knowledge in Vajrayana, but basi­
cally, what means and knowledge is all about is to realize the very basic, 
innate nature of mind. Therefore, "Means and knowledge is just this.'' 
The vast and profound is just this. 
'Profound' refers to the state of emptiness, the mind of all buddhas. 
'Vast' refers to the extensive actions undertaken to benefit all sentient 
beings, called bodhisattva conduct. Sometimes the vast and the pro­
found refer to the different types of Buddhist scriptures, the different 
44 
SoNGS oF NAROPA 
levels and so forth. Whatever the categories may be, the very essence, 
the very heart of these teachings that are profound and extensive is 
nothing other than the nature of mind. "The vast and the profound is 
just this." 
Samantabhadra with consort is just this. 
According to the teachings of the Great Perfection, Dzogpa Chenpo, 
the originally awakened state is depicted as Samantabhadra in union 
with his consort Samantabhadri, emphasizing the knowledge aspect. 
Samantabhadra is known as the Primordially Awakened One who 
never fell into samsara and thus never had to be enlightened at some 
point afterwards. He is considered the original state of enlightenment 
itsel£ What is this buddha Samantabhadra in actuality? It is the nature 
of our own mind. 
This space and wisdom, perceiving while being empty, 
Is what is called 'knowing original enlightenment.' 
This unity of basic space and wisdom, of emptiness and original 
wakefulness, is the knowledge of original enlightenment. In other 
words, the heart of the matter is to truly realize what originally is -
the primordially awakened state. The nature of our minds and the na­
ture of the fully enlightened buddhas' mind are both primordially 
empty and naturally cognizant. This nature is not a thing that we make 
enlightened by creating an empty or cognizant entity that didn't previ­
ously exist. If we don't practice, our nature will not lose being empty 
and cognizant. If we do practice it is not that we achieve an empty­
cognizant state. The 'space and wisdom' described here is our basic 
nature, the original unity of empty cognizance, which has always ex­
isted and will continue to exist. What is necessary is to realize it, to 
know it-described here as 'knowing original enlightenment.'+ 
45 
4 
WHETHER WE STUDY THE DHARMA or apply it in practice, all the 
mahasiddhas or accomplished masters and all the spiritual 
teachers of the past have taught that it is important to have correct 
motivation. Adopting pure motivation ensures that our Dharma prac­
tice will be pure. Conversely, if we have an impure, ego-oriented moti­
vation when studying and practicing, it is impossible to reach perfec­
tion through practice. Sometimes it may seem difficult to really have 
pure motivation, but if we try our best, it is possible. This is a key in­
struction: we should try our best to transform our motivation into 
something really pure. 
Now I will continue with the life story of Naropa. I have covered 
how Naropa was given the ripening empowerments through thirteen 
symbolic indications. Mter that, Tilopa imparted the liberating in­
structions, also known as the oral instructions in the path of liberation. 
Tilopa put Naropa through twelve major trials, giving one pith in­
struction at the end of each. The first instruction is called 'the univer­
sally wish-fulfilling jewel.' 
At one point Tilopa remained in samadhi for an entire year. 
Although Naropa circumambulated him, prostrated, and made suppli­
cations, Tilopa did not say a single thing. At the end of the year, 
Tilopa opened his eyes and looked at Naropa. When Naropa asked for 
SoNGS OF NAROPA 
the liberating instruction, Tilopa stood up and said, "If you want a lib­
erating instruction, follow me." They went up onto the roof of the 
monastery of Odantapuri, and Tilopa said, "If a worthy disciple were 
here, he would jump." Naropa looked around and thought, "It seems 
like there is no one else except me to whom he could be talking!" 
Naropa then simply jumped off the roo£ He landed quite painfully in 
the dirt, having broken many bones. Tilopa came by and said, 'What's 
up? What are you doing?" Naropa replied, 'Well, I'm lying in the dirt 
because my bones are broken. It's very difficult." Tilopa replied, "To 
cling to this body as being yourself is difficult. Actually, it is like a clay 
pot -it doesn't really matter that much if it breaks." Tilopa then 
touched him gendy, and Naropa's pain disappeared. 
This was the first of Naropa's twelve major trials, Tilopa then said, 
"Now I'll give you the pith instruction known as the universally wish­
fulfilling jewel." This teaching is mainly about the various visualiza­
tions of the deity Chakrasamvara and his consort Vajra Y ogini. 
Depending on the classification, there are either three or six forms of 
Chakrasamvara. In a condensed form, when one emphasizes skillful 
means, Chakrasamvara is practiced as a single form. When one em­
phasizes the knowledge aspect, he is visualized with his consort Vajra 
Yogini. In a more extensive way, there is the mandala of Chakrasam­
vara with sixty-two deities, and the mandala of Vajra Yogini with fif­
teen deities. There are also medium versions of these practices, in 
which Chakrasamvara has thirteen deities and Vajra Yogini has seven 
goddesses. Tilopa gave Naropa the instructions on how to practice all 
these different ways. 
Mter that, Tilopa again remained for one year in the state of 
samadhi. Mter a year when he opened his eyes and looked at Naropa, 
Naropa again requested, "Please bestow the pith instructions." Tilopa 
got up and said, "If you want them, follow me." They came to a large 
plain where a huge fire was burning. Tilopa told him, "If you are my 
disciple, jump into that fire." Naropa immediately did as he was told. 
He got quite badly burned, of course, and suffered terribly. When 
47 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
Tilopa asked him, "How are you doing?" Naropa answered, "This body 
of mine, the result of karmic ripening, didn't fare well from its encoun­
ter with the element of fire. That is why I'm suffering." Tilopa re­
sponded, "To cling to this transient body as being yourself is what's 
actually painful. It doesn't matter that much if it's burned a bit. Now 
I'll give you an instruction in what does matter." He then gave the in­
struction on equal taste: mingling pain with equal taste, mingling dis­
turbing emotions with equal taste, and mingling pleasure with equal 
taste. In other words, whatever the content of one's experience is, it is 
possible to train in equal taste. Once again Tilopa touched N aropa 
gently and all his pain vanished. 
Mter having given the teachings on equal taste, Tilopa went to stay 
in the jungle and remain in samadhi. He told Naropa, "Serve me. Go 
beg for alms and get us food." So Naropa did that every day, returning 
with food for Tilopa. Usually Tilopa didn't seem to appreciate the food 
at all; he just ate it. However, one day Tilopa expressed great pleasure 
when eating the rice; remarking how nice the taste was. N aropa 
thought, "Usually, he isn't so enthusiastic, but today I have the chance 
to please him. Maybe I should go ask for more." Tilopa said again, 
"Very good! This food has an excellent taste." So Naropa went off, 
carrying with him a pot of water. He requested more rice, but the 
benefactor refused to give any. Naropa waited until he thought the man 
wasn't looking, then dipped his bowl into the food, filled it and ran off. 
Unfortunately, somebody did see him doing this. Now, according to 
Indian custom, putting one's bowl into a central container of food 
contaminates everything. The benefactor and his companions got very 
upset and chased after Naropa, who took flight with them in hot pur­
suit. At one point he poured his vase of water all around him, and it 
transformed itself into a lake. His pursuers couldn't reach him because 
he was in an island in the center, so they all got into a boat in order to 
catch him. When they got close, N aropa took his sword in hand and 
waved it around in the air above his head, creating an iron dome-like 
shelter. The benefactor's people set a fire outside it. The dome became 
SoNGs oF NAROPA 
so hot inside that Naropa eventually couldn't bear it and had to come 
out. The benefactor and his followers then beat him severely and tried 
to strangle him. Naropa again suffered miserably. 
When he finally returned, Tilopa asked, 'What happened?" Naropa 
told the story about how he was beaten and strangled, and moaned 
about how much pain he was in. Tilopa said, "In samsaric existence, it 
doesn't really matter if you get ruffled up a bit. What is really important 
is the samaya." This was the instruction in the wish-fulfilling jewel of 
samaya, looking into the mirror of one's mind. Tilopa then gave him 
the instruction on how to keep a pure link between master and disciple. 
After that he gently touched him once more, and Naropa's pain van­
ished. 
A few days later, Tilopa told him, "If you want a pith instruction, 
follow me." They came to a steep cliff below which a river raged in 
great turmoil. Tilopa said, "I want to go to the other side. Please ar­
range yourself as a bridge so that I can walk on top of you and arrive at 
the other shore." Naropa did so. When Tilopa was halfway across, 
standing on the middle of Naropa's back, he stepped extra-hard. 
Naropa fell in the freezing water, which also happened to be full of 
leeches. Eventually Naropa crawled out of the river and dragged him­
self soaking wet . back to Tilopa. Tilopa asked, 'What happened?" 
Naropa answered, "It was so cold. I really suffered, and on top of that 
these horrible leeches sucked my blood." Tilopa said, "Actually, to get 
cold and be attacked by leeches is not such a big deal. What is impor­
tant is an instruction called tummo." Tilopa then gave him the fourth 
pith instruction on how to practice tummo. 
On another occasion, Tilopa said, "Bring me a piece of bamboo." 
Tilopa split it up into thin pieces and stuck them into Naropa's body. 
Naropa sat there in great pain. Tilopa asked him, "How are you 
doing?," and Naropa replied, "It really hurts." Tilopa responded, "I 
think you need a pith instruction in the illusory body," and he imparted 
it to N aropa. 
49 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
Next, they went out onto a vast plain. In the distance they could just 
see a man carrying a big load. Tilopa said, "That man is going to hurt 
us! Go chase him away!" Naropa started to run after the man, but no 
matter how fast or how long he ran, he could never catch him. The 
man appeared to be even farther away. finally, he reached the point of 
complete exhaustion and collapsed on the ground. Tilopa came by and 
inquired, "How are you doing?" Naropa said, "I am so exhausted, I 
cannot possibly move." Tilopa told him, "You have been roaming about 
in samsara for so long that this little amount of exertion should be no 
big deal. Here, I'll give you an instruction in dream practice." 
So you see the pattern: first N aropa would undergo a major trial; 
then Tilopa would give him an important pith instruction. Out of the 
twelve major trials, we have covered six so far. I'll tell you about the 
other six later. Right now I'd like to get back to discussing the song. 
This self-knowing, while one is still defiled, 
Does not depend on other things, 
So self-existing wakefulness is just this. 
I have already covered the topic on the innate emptiness of mind. I 
have more to say on this point, because it's really necessary to under­
stand it thoroughly Although we possess buddha nature, we are not 
utterly pure and perfect like a buddha. We still have disturbing emo­
tions, and are covered by karma and obscurations. Although we are 
veiled by these defilements, our empty essence remains unchanged, 
untainted by these obscurations. Because it is not dependent upon 
anything else, it is simply called self-existing wakefulness -rangjung 
yeshe. 
Being aware, it is cognizance. 
The nature of our mind is empty of any entity whatsoever. It is not 
a concrete thing. When we search for our mind, where is it? What is 
this mind? What does it fook like? No matter how much we analyze, 
we never find an actual object that we can feel comfortable pointing at 
so 
SoNGs oF NAROPA 
and saying, "This thing is my mind." This is proof that the mind is 
empty, like space. But the emptiness of mind is not exacdy the same as 
space, which is merely a physical emptiness. While space is a complete 
nothing, a void without wakefulness, empty mind is able to cognize 
while being empty. Clarity exists in the sense of being aware, being 
conscious. That is why Naropa said, "Being aware, it is cognizance." 
A natural knowing that is free of thought. 
This self-knowing cannot possibly form thoughts. 
This empty essence is rigpa, knowing. This knowing quality has two 
options. It can face away from itself towards external objects, making 
thoughts that grasp in delusion. Here I am speaking ofbeing aware in a 
deluded fashion, of being mistaken in the sense that there is no know­
ing what the nature of mind is. The other possibility is that this 
knowing quality looks towards itself and sees how the empty nature of 
mind actually is. This is a recognizing of the nature of mind itself. At 
this point there is no thought. You see in actuality. When there is this 
kind of direct seeing, it is not possible to form any concepts. Self­
knowing is free of all thoughts. 
So, our minds have two aspects: crude or coarse thinking, which is 
deluded; and the nature of mind. In thinking, the mind faces away 
from itself towards objects, which is mistaken. Yet, if while thinking of 
something, we look the opposite way into what thinks, we see there is 
no thinker of the thought at all. This is because the thinker is empty 
and in concrete; not some thing that thinks. This is why N aropa said 
that the essence of mind is nonconceptual. 
One of Milarepa's students, called Nyama Paltabum, once asked 
him, "I can train in natural mind, but what do I do when a thought 
arises?" Milarepa answered, 'When you train in natural mind, you 
should see thoughts as the magical display of mind. Then work to fur­
ther establish the natural state of mind." What Milarepa was saying 
was that thoughts are merely an expression of the mind, like waves 
moving on the surface of water. Realizing this, we should continue to 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
train further, and establish that the movements of thoughts are simply 
the magical display of mind. 'When you more deeply explore the 
natural state of mind," Milarepa continued, "you will eventually realize 
that it is nonconceptual," meaning free of any thought whatsoever. 
Without conceptualizing a 'mind,' 
Since it is not something to be conceived, 
This original wakefulness, cognizant yet thought-free, 
Is like the wisdom of the T athagata. 
This empty nature of mind is also cognizant. It is cognizant yet 
thought-free. Empty mind is able to know whatever takes place. It is a 
fact that we do perceive; we do experience; we do cognize. This basic 
quality of being cognizant is not momentary; it is always there. Our 
sense of knowing, our original wakefulness is cognizant, yet thought­
free. This basic quality of being awake does not fluctuate. It is not 
something that occurs all of a sudden. It is primordial. 
However, all the various thought movements, along with emotions 
like anger or attachment, are momentary. It is important to distinguish 
between temporary thought movements and the primordial cognizance 
that is the nature of mind. 
When Naropa writes, 'Like the wisdom of the Tathagata,' he refers 
to the way a buddha, a fully enlightened one, perceives. That kind of 
wisdom is original wakefulness, which sees the nature of all things as 
they are. It is ultimate truth, in actuality. At the same time wisdom 
perceives the superficial or relative reality of all existing things. One 
may wonder if a tathagatha's experience of perceiving relative truth is 
somehow mixed with thoughts and emotions of pleasure and pain, like 
and dislike. The answer is no, it isn't. A tathagata's way of perceiving is 
totally free of that. 
Therefore, it is taught, "Realize that luminous mind 
Is the mind of original wakefulness, 
And don't seek an enlightenment separate from that." 
SoNGS oF NAROPA 
'Luminous mind' means that the nature of mind itself is an awake 
brightness which is original wakefulness. Our basic nature is in itself 
the state of realization of all buddhas. To fully awaken to this natural 
state, it is not necessary to go to some other place to reach enlighten­
ment. The state of enlightenment is not extrinsic to ourselves. Buddha­
hood is not something that will appear suddenly in the future. It is 
really nothing other than a matter of first recognizing, then fully train­
ing in and realizing in actuality, the nature of our own mind. That is 
why Naropa said, "Don't seek an enlightenment separate from that." 
The awakened state of enlightenment, the real buddha, is not some­
thing we should seek separate from the nature of our own mind. 
Nevertheless, this mind does become disturbed 
By the defilement of momentary thoughts. 
Nevertheless, having not fully realized that this is so, we do get in­
volved in thoughts of this and that, in the temporary movements of 
mind. We get attached; we become angry; we feel competitive. While 
involved in· these disturbing emotions, we lose the realization that the 
nature of our mind is original empty cognizance. We are obscured by 
ignorance and disturbing emotions, and at that moment we cannot 
really claim to be a buddha. Although our real nature is empty cogni­
zance, identical with that of the awakened ones, while we are involved 
in disturbing emotions, while we are ignorant, it doesn't help much to 
say that we are the buddha. 
Like water, like gold, like the sky, 
It may be either pure or impure. 
This is a statement of profound truth: though our essence is utterly 
pure, we are at the same time temporarily obscured, temporarily defiled. 
There seems to be a contradiction here at first glance. It is very hard to 
grasp how something can simultaneously be both pure and defiled. The 
Uttaratantra describes this state with eight analogies, while. Naropa 
here uses the three examples of water, gold, and the sky. Water is in 
53 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
itself always water. It is pure in being water; but it can appear to be 
muddy. When there is dirt in the water, at that moment it doesn't 
appear to be clean. The water itself is unchanged, whatever its 
condition. If you let muddy water settle, the water will again be seen in 
its original state. Another example is of gold. A nugget of gold in its 
natural state remains pure in terms of its basic characteristic of being 
gold. Even though it may be covered by dirt or other foreign elements 
and may not look like pure gold, in essence the gold is unchanged. It is 
the same way with the sky: The sky is inherently empty, yet it's possible 
for it to be covered by clouds. At other times when there are no clouds, 
a clear sky appears- yet the sky itself has not changed. 
These analogies illustrate how something can be at once pure and 
impure. Water can be clear or muddy; gold can be pure or encrusted in 
dirt; and the sky can either be clear or covered by clouds. Likewise, al­
though our original nature is unchanging and empty in itself, it can be 
either impure- when it's covered by thought involvement- or pure 
-when conceptual thinking is absent. 
But the naturally luminous mind 
Is free from even a hair-tip of concrete substance, 
Like the analogy of a sky flower. 
It does not exist as it seems to be, 
Therefore, it cannot be established to be nonexistent. 
Being mutually dependent, 
When one side is invalid, the other side also does not 
exist. 
This naturally luminous mind, the basic condition or the nature of 
mind itself, does not possess any concrete existence whatsoever, not 
even as much as a hair tip. It is like the example of a flower made out of 
air. The existence of such a flower cannot be established. Likewise, we 
cannot say that the mind exists in a concrete way, because it is not 
made out of anything whatsoever. At the same time, we cannot estab-
54 
SoNGs oF NAROPA 
lish that it is non-existent, because non-existence is dependent upon 
something being existent. We use the word non-existent to negate 
something that was already thought to exist. If the nature of mind can­
not be established as existent to begin with, there is also nothing neces­
sary to negate as being non-existent. Isn't it true, then, that the two 
concepts of existing and not existing are mutually dependent? One de­
pends upon the other, just like 'this side' depends on 'that side.' Thus, 
we cannot say that mind neither exists nor does not exist. 
Terms like 'this side' or 'that side' can only be used in relation to 
each other. If there wasn't another side to compare it to, 'this side' 
wouldn't make any sense. The two constructs are mutually dependent. 
If the first term doesn't exist, the validity of the second naturally col­
lapses. 
Mind is neither existent nor nonexistent, 
Since each of these [constructs] is negated. 
It is also not both, 
Since existing and not existing are a contradiction. 
You cannot say that the nature of mind both exists and does not 
exist at the same time, because that is a contradiction. You cannot have 
something that both is and is not. Since each of them is negated, indi­
vidually, then having either one or the other, or both at the same time, 
or neither one or the other-all of these statements collapse under the 
weight of their own internal contradictions.+ 
55 
5 
0 NCE AGAIN I WOULD LIKE TO REPEAT the importance of forming 
the resolve towards complete and true enlightenment. Develop 
the bodhichitta attitude, and purify your motivation. This pure moti­
vation ensures that we will progress in our intended direction and 
thereby progress in our practice. 
I have been explaining parts of the life story of N aropa, because I 
believe that by knowing more about who Naropa was and what he did, 
you will have more faith when you study his teachings. When our 
minds are filled with the openness of devotion, we are better able to 
taste the meaning of his words, to really savor them. Devotion arises 
naturally when we understand the kind of person Naropa was, the 
master he followed, and the many hardship he gladly undertook in or­
der to receive the pith instructions. Understanding the depth of 
Naropa's devotion to the teachings will naturally inspire our own. 
I mentioned earlier that Naropa received teachings in two sets or 
two aspects: the path of ripening and the path of liberation. I also ex­
plained how he underwent twelve major trials in order to receive twelve 
teachings. I've already described six of these, the last being the instruc­
tion in milam or dream practice. Now we come to the seventh instruc­
tion, which was on luminosity, in Tibetan known as osel. 
SoNGs oF NAROPA 
Once again, Tilopa arose from his samadhi and told Naropa, 
"Follow me!" They went off, and after a while came across a marriage 
procession. The chieftain of the land was escorting his bride, who rode 
on top of an elephant. Casually Tilopa said, "Ifl had a worthy disciple, 
he would jump up on that elephant, grab hold of the bride and drag her 
across the ground." Naropa took that comment personally. He jumped 
up on the elephant, grabbed hold of the bride, dragged her down and 
pulled her across the ground. Immediately, of course, the minister's 
people jumped on him and gave him a severe thrashing, beating him 
almost to a pulp. Later, Tilopa asked him, "How are you doing?," and 
Naropa replied, 'Well, I was beaten mercilessly by the chieftain's 
people. I feel awful." Tilopa said, 'When this body which you perceive 
as being yourself gets a thrashing, it's not such a big deal. What you 
need is the instruction in luminosity" -in osel, which he then gave to 
him. 
The eighth instruction Naropa received was on phowa, the ejection 
of consciousness. Tilopa took N aropa for a walk once more, and they 
came to a place where the king, his queens, ministers and retinue were 
traveling. Tilopa rather off-handedly remarked, "You know, if I had a 
worthy disciple, he would leap up, seize that queen there and give her a 
good slap." Without hesitation Naropa did just that. And again he got 
beaten, not just severely, but this time almost to. death. Later on, when 
Tilopa came and asked, "What happened to you?" Naropa replied, 
"Well, the king was like a bow and I was like an arrow that was shot 
here and there until finally my mind left my body." Tilopa said, 
"Leaving this illusory body behind is not such a big deal. What is 
necessary is to know how to eject consciousness." Naropa then received 
the teaching on phowa, the ejection of consciousness. 
The next teaching, the ninth, concerns the transference of con­
sciousness, drong-jug in Tibetan. Again, a dramatic story precedes the 
teaching. Tilopa once more took Naropa for a walk. This time they 
came upon a prince riding in a chariot. The prince was beautifully or­
namented with an elaborate crown, rich jewelry and splendid clothing. 
57 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
Tilopa remarked, "Ifl had a worthy disciple, he would leap up onto the 
chariot, snatch all the jewelry off the prince and kick him off." Naropa 
proceeded to do exactly that. All the prince's bodyguards tried to seize 
him, but this time Naropa fled. He managed to escape back to Tilopa, 
shouting said, "Protect me! Protect me!". When the soldiers arrived, 
Tilopa asked them, 'What do you want?" They said, 'We want this 
bandit who tried to steal the prince's jewelry and kick him off his 
chariot. Let us have that one!", they raged, pointing at Naropa. Tilopa 
said, 'Well, if he did that it's his own fault; you can have him." They 
beat N aropa nearly to death. When Tilopa asked him "How are you 
doing?," Naropa groaned, "I'm almost dead." Tilopa responded, "To 
leave behind this body is not such a big deal. What you need is the 
teaching in transference of consciousness," which he then gave. 
Now we will leave off with the biography and return to the song. 
Up until this point I have discussed how the nature of mind is empty in 
essence. It is not a void blank, however. The nature of mind, while 
unconstructed, is able to cognize and experience. This empty cogni­
zance cannot be established as an existing thing. At the same time, it is 
not something that can be established as being nothing, totally non­
existent. It's not both of these, and it's not neither of these. In other 
words, it totally defies any theory we may formulate about it. 
It is not something material, 
Nor is it apart from what is experienced as material. 
Therefore, it is free from all constructs. 
This is how I have established the ultimate: 
"Mind is based on space," as it is said. 
This unconstructed self-knowing 
Perceives while empty, and while empty it perceives. 
It is not necessary to establish the nature of mind as something that 
remains after suppressing all relative experience. Mind nature is not 
only relative experience, of course. That's why the text says "It is not 
SoNGS oF NAROPA 
something material". However, it is not apart from what is experienced 
as material- and "therefore, it is free from all constructs," or devoid of 
all mental concepts. 
"This is how I have established the ultimate," the real meaning. 
'"Mind is based on space."' Space is empty by itsel£ In the same way 
that space is naturally empty, mind is naturally empty. This uncon­
structed self-knowing is both empty and cognizant. It is unconstructed 
in the sense that it cannot be conceptualized as being either existent or 
nonexistent, both or neither. Still, while remaining nothing whatsoever 
that can be established, it experiences whatever takes place. 
Experience and emptiness are therefore indivisible, 
You often hear the statement that appearances and emptiness are a 
unity- that perception and emptiness are indivisible. Usually we as­
sume that the perceived is not empty, because we understand emptiness 
of experience to be no experience. Thinking that emptiness and expe­
rience are contradictory and mutually exclusive is a mistake. In reality, 
all the accomplished masters of the past have realized that experience 
and emptiness are an indivisible unity. That which experiences is 
definitely empty, yet at the same time, this very emptiness allows any 
experience to unfold. Thus, mind nature is empty while experiencing, 
and it experiences while being empty. 
Like the analogy of the moon in water. 
This indivisibility of experience and emptiness appears to be contra­
dictory from an ordinary point of view. When we try to understand it 
through reason, it is still difficult to grasp exactly how experience and 
emptiness are indivisible. And when we try to bring this into our own 
experience in actuality, it is still difficult! That is why Naropa uses a 
comparison to illustrate this point -"Like the analogy of the moon in 
water." The moon can be reflected on the surface of water, can't it? 
While it looks like there is a moon in the water, the moon is not actu­
ally in the water. Nonetheless, while there never was and never will be 
59 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
any moon in the water, we still see the moon right there on the surface. 
We see it-but it isn't really there. That is a very good analogy for 
how experience and emptiness are indivisible. When looking at external 
things, we do find that something appears, something is perceived; but 
while appearing, it does not really exist. In this way, perception and 
emptiness are indivisible. 
That was about perceived objects. In meditation training, we should 
look towards the perceiving mind. If we look into that which perceives 
directly, and not as an act of reasoning, we can discover the unity of 
perception and emptiness in a very immediate and actual fashion. We 
don't have to infer that this is so: we can actually see that, by looking 
for the mind that perceives and failing to find any real thing that is the 
mind. Mind is empty of any identity whatsoever; yet we still experience 
whatever takes place. Experience is not blocked or suppressed. To sum 
up: while being empty, there is experience; while experiencing, mind is 
still empty. 
In the tradition of the pith instructions, the lineage masters speak of 
present, naked, ordinary mind. This present ordinary mind is the very 
nature of superficial experience. Any common situation in which we 
think of something or experience something is known as relative truth. 
At that very moment, leave that which experiences uncontrived. Don't 
try to alter or correct its nature in any way whatsoever. Simply allow the 
natural state of experience to continue. That itself is the ultimate truth, 
the nature of mind. When we don't do anything to our nature, the very 
essence of relative experience is the ultimate. To reiterate: first, we become 
aware of the fact that our minds have a cognizant aspect, that we 
experience. By simply allowing this cognizant quality to be, without 
trying to modify it or improve upon it, it becomes obvious that this 
mind is not made out of anything -that it is empty. In addition, it 
becomes perfectly clear that being empty and being cognizant are an 
indivisible unity. 
This is how I have established nonduality: 
"Space is not based on anything," as it is said. 
6o 
SoNGS oF NAROPA 
Space is by nature empty; mind too is by nature empty. This mind is 
self-knowing, unconstructed. It is not made out of anything: it does 
not exist as something, and neither does it not exist. It defies any pos­
sible idea we can have about it. 
This unconstructed self-knowing 
Is itself the very basis of samsara. 
Every experience that takes place, whether pleasant or unpleasant, is 
only possible because of the cognizant quality of the nature of mind. If 
we are in one of the higher realms, experiencing the pleasure or happi­
ness of being a god or a human being, our experience only takes place 
because of the cognizant nature of mind. Equally, if we find ourselves 
in the hell realms being tormented by unceasing suffering and pain, 
that also takes place because of the cognizant nature of mind. Thus, 
mind's natural cognizance is the very basis of samsara. The reason why 
samsaric experiences do take place is because this cognizant nature of 
mind is ignorant and deluded. This state of deluded experience is called 
'samsara'. 
Nirvana as well is also just this. 
Undeluded experience is called 'nirvana'. When leaving behind so­
called samsara and attaining nirvana, mind does not go to some other 
location. The essential nature of mind remains totally unchanged. It's 
not like the mind travels to another land called nirvana. 
The Great Middle Way is also just this. 
This nature of mind has been established as being natural emptiness 
by means of the great reasoning propagated by Nagarjuna, Shantideva, 
Chandrakirti and other great masters. 
That to be seen is also just this. 
That to train in is also just this. 
61 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
When speaking of path, there are two aspects: the path of ordinary 
beings and the path of noble beings. The path of noble beings has three 
divisions: the path of seeing, the path of cultivation and the path of no 
more learning. In the first division, what is it exacdy that is being seen? 
It is the innate nature of things, the innate truth. Seeing the innate 
truth is thus the starting point of the path of seeing. That is why 
Naropa states, "That to be seen is also just this." The path of cultiva­
tion involves growing more accustomed to seeing the innate nature of 
things. The practitioner trains again and again, cultivating his or her 
insights further and further. Thus, Naropa says "That to train in is also 
just this." 
That to attain is also just this. 
The valid tiuth is also just this. 
So, the first thing we should do is to see the innate nature; next is to 
train in that. In other words, having seen what should be seen through 
the path of seeing and trained what should be trained in through the 
path of cultivation; the outcome of these actions is the attainment of 
fruition, which is called the path of no more learning. ''That to attain is 
also just this," which is no other than the basic state of the mind itsel£ 
"The valid truth is also just this." When distinguishing between what is 
true and false, we see that there is something that is really true -the 
basic state, the basic nature. Therefore, the valid truth is also just this. 
The renowned threefold tantras 
Ofbasic cause, method, and result, 
And what is known as ground, path, and fruition, 
Are just different situations of this. 
The vajra vehicles of Secret Mantra mention the three-fold tantras 
or continuity of cause, method and result. The tantra of cause is simply 
the buddha nature present as the essence of mind of an ordinary being. 
The tantra of method refers to the skillful means of the development 
and completion stages that belong to the path. The tantra of result is 
6z 
SoNGS oF NAROPA 
the fruition; the outcome of having practiced the path and realized 
one's potential. While these three differ in name, in actuality, the very 
basis for practice -the cause tantra -is simply buddha nature, the 
basic nature of mind. The principle of development and completion is 
also nothing other than that; and what is realized as the result is this 
very nature itself. 
It is exactly the same with ground, path and fruition: the difference 
between these is merely a variance in terminology. The terms cause, 
method, and result belong primarily to Vajrayana, while ground, path, 
and fruition could be used either in the sutra system or in the Vajrayana 
context. In the Uttaratantra there is a clear explanation of the meaning 
of ground, path and fruition in terms of these being impure, semi-pure 
and utterly pure. Impure refers to the starting point, the ground of 
being an ordinary sentient being. Semi-pure means one is already 
established on the path; and utterly pure refers to the time of fruition, 
when one has attained the ultimate result of buddhahood. All these 
"are just different situations of this." In different Dharma teachings, 
other words are used. 
The basic consciousness, the all-ground, 
All possible aggregates in samsara, 
Are known as the 'dependent,' and so forth. 
One example is the basic consciousness, the all-ground. As long as a 
person is involved in samsaric existence, this basic state is known as 'the 
dependent'. The Mind Only school, the Yogachara philosophy, explains 
three characteristics or three natures, called 'the imagined,' 'the depend­
ent' and 'the absolute.' In this context, the word 'dependent' refers to 
the dependent as being indivisible from the nature of mind itself. 
So, up until now we have established that mind is empty. Next, 
Naropa will introduce that this emptiness of mind is spontaneously 
present. If you have any doubts or uncertainty at this point, feel free to 
clear them up now. 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
Student: I have a question about the expression 'luminous mind.' What 
does the word luminous mean? Is it a symbol for something you can't 
explain in words, or is it like visible light that we can see? 
Rinpoche: The word iisalwa, often translated as luminous, is related to 
the word light in that it expresses some kind of brightness or clarity. 
However, the real meaning of this is not a light that is visible to the 
eye. Luminosity refers more to the capacity to know. This ability is 
present within us at any point in that we always can understand; we 
always have a readiness to perceive and cognize. So luminosity is the 
capacity to know. Hearing that mind is emptiness may lead us to be­
lieve that there is no mind. It sounds like we are a mindless piece of 
matter, which we are not. We are able to experience. Our natural cog­
nizance is available at any moment. That is luminosity, which is not 
made out of anything whatsoever. 
Student: Who experiences the taste of empty luminosity? 
Rinpoche: This is something you should try to discover in your medita­
tion training! (students laugh.) You should look into what is it actually 
that experiences. (Rinpoche laughs.) 
Student: How beneficial is it when I sit in these teachings, since I don't 
understand much of this at all? I like it anyway, but my meditation 
practice is not very good, not very deep. 
Rinpoche: It's very nice that you want to attend the seminar, because, as 
we repeat daily in the chanting, "devotion is the head of meditation, as 
is taught" Devotion can be equated with sincere interest. Being inter­
ested makes it possible to understand the teachings. Remember, 
though, the teachings are about your own mind, which is not some­
thing that is that far away from you (students laugh). If you can be a 
little more diligent in your meditation practice, I feel the point of this 
will slowly dawn upon you. In reality, what Naropa speaks about is not 
impossible to understand, nor to realize. 
Same student (holding up the Tibetan text): But this is really crazy ... 
Translator: You are holding the text upside down (students laugh). 
SoNGS OF NAROPA 
Same student: Sorry, I just feel a little bit sick about all these words 
about empty mind and luminosity. I feel like a Dharma junkie -
I 
need these teachings, but I can't stand them. How can I deal with this? 
I comprehend what you're saying intellectually, but it doesn't reach my 
heart. Is it better for me to go practice than to sit in these teachings? 
Rinpoche: I would like to give a direct and frank reply now (students 
laugh). What I'm going to say is true. You are a little proud. You hold 
the thought, "Listening to this teaching about emptiness again and 
again doesn't do much for me." Holding onto that thought is a form of 
pride. Try to reduce that pride, and replace that rigidity with interest. 
Think, "These words come from a great accomplished master. Maybe 
there is something I can learn from them." Then lend your ear and sin­
cerely listen. I feel that you will be able to understand something then. 
(Rinpoche laughs). 
Another student: Rinpoche, earlier you quoted Naropa as saying, "Self­
knowing cannot possibly conceive itsel£" Does he mean it can't form 
concepts about itself, or that it doesn't have experience of itself? 
Rinpoche: The term 'self-knowing' refers to the Tibetan rang-rig. This 
is a synonym for the nature of mind, which is naturally aware, cogni­
zant by itsel£ "Cannot possibly conceive itself," means that while you 
can experience the nature of mind, what our nature is, you cannot 
conceive of it as an object of thought. The nature of mind is not some­
thing that can be conceived of or thought of. In logic there are two 
different ways of perceiving: conceptual and non-conceptual. You can­
not make your own nature an object of conceptual thought. It can only 
be experienced while one is free of concepts. 
Student: I think, Rinpoche, you are speaking to us through a micro­
phone, and the microphone is being recorded by a tape recorder. Most 
of us arrived in Nepal by jet plane, and you have a car that takes you to 
Namo Buddha. These things actually provide some merit. They allow 
Dharma to be spread and more people to understand the Dharma. 
Nevertheless they are in our world because minds have gone out in 
thought as opposed to in, as in the teachings and meditation. I'm won-
6s 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
dering how do we balance these two things in our lives.: How much 
time and effort should we devote to "progress," or thoughts which cre­
ate objects that benefit spreading the Dharma, and how much should 
we spend on the 
actual practice itself? 
Rinpoche: You may be familiar with the distinction between relative 
truth and ultimate truth. The Buddha gave teachings to enable sentient 
beings to reach permanent happiness and enlightenment. He told them 
that the true way to do so was to turn the attention towards the ulti­
mate nature of mind and train in that. While doing so, while practicing 
to reach enlightenment, we still live within relative circumstances, don't 
we? It's important to remember that these circumstances are relative 
truth, not relative falsehood. There is some genuineness in them, 
although it is relative This was exemplified very nicely by the eighty 
mahasiddhas. As I mentioned before, they all had different occupa­
tions. A few herded cattle while training in Mahamudra. Tilopa 
pounded sesame seeds into oil while training in Mahamudra. Another 
ruled his country while training in Mahamudra; and another, Nagar­
juna, composed precious treatises on the Dharma while training in 
Mahamudra. Isn't it quite wonderful that this kind of simultaneous 
activity is possible? 
Student: You mentioned three natures: the imputed or imagined nature, 
the dependent nature, and the absolute nature. What is the difference 
between these? 
Rinpoche: The Tibetan words for the dependent and the absolute are 
shenwang and yongdrub. Shenwang refers to the perceiving quality, and 
yongdrub to the empty quality. Any given thing has a perceived as well 
as an empty quality to it. Perceiving is dependent, in that it is not 
something that is stable in itself. Perceiving takes place in conjunction 
with various factors, whereas emptiness is independent. It could stand 
alone, so to say, and is therefore called absolute. These two aspects are 
not utterly separate, however. Let's take the example of the moon in 
water. When the moon is reflected on the surface of water, the fact that 
there is no real moon, or the emptiness of moon in that reflection, is 
66 
SoNGS oF NAROPA 
something that is absolute. That emptiness is unshakable. Nobody can 
change the ultimate fact that there is no real moon in the water. How­
ever, the appearance of the moon is dependent. Because of the con­
junction of the moon in the sky and the surface of the water, the 
reflection has to appear. It has no choice. That is why it is called 
dependent.+ 
6 
I HAVE ALREADY DESCRIBED NINE of the twelve major trials Naropa 
underwent, and how Naropa received one very important, profound 
instruction at the end of each of these. In the tenth trial, Tilopa said to 
Naropa, "At this time, you must accept a consort, a dakini." Naropa did 
so, but the dakini he found was a very tough one who put him through 
a lot of pain and misery. Mter a few encounters with her, he met 
Tilopa, who asked, "How are you doing?" N aropa said, "I feel terrible 
- I am really suffering!" Tilopa told him: "Both samsara and nirvana 
do not really exist. What you need is the instruction in how to sustain 
the state of samadhi while engaging with a dakini." He imparted to 
Naropa the instructions known as the great bliss of the lower gate. 
Mter this Tilopa said, "Well, you'd better become a monk, since 
having a consort didn't seem to help you very much. At the same time 
you should punish yourself for how you have been behaving. Since all 
your trouble is caused by your secret chakra, you should take a stone 
and give it a battering!" Naropa did that, and he of course suffered im­
mensely. Tilopa came by and asked, "How are you doing?" Naropa 
said, "Well, I feel just terrible." Tilopa replied, "What you need is the 
instruction on equal taste." For the eleventh instruction, he gave him 
the instruction called Nine Cycles of Equal Taste. Sometimes we feel 
pleasure; sometimes we feel pain; sometimes joy; sometimes sorrow. 
68 
SoNGs OF NAROPA 
The instruction Naropa received was on equalizing the state of all 
these. 
The last instruction, the twelfth, is the instruction in Mahamudra. 
Tilopa said to Naropa, ''You should offer me your consort." Naropa did 
so. When Tilopa received Naropa's consort, he slapped her. He asked 
Naropa, "How do you feel now when I beat up your consort?" Naropa 
replied, "I feel fine. I had the great fortune to be able to offer my con­
sort to my teacher, so I experience great bliss because of that." Within 
that state Tilopa instructed him in Mahamudra. 
After this, Tilopa imparted some further vital instructions. In order 
to receive these significant instructions, Naropa offered his body, which 
was the greatest offering. The story is as follows: Tilopa said, "Come! 
Follow me." They went out onto a vast open plain and Tilopa said, "I'll 
give you the teaching, but first prepare the site; make a mandala offer­
ing." To make the area clean, Naropa had to sprinkle water to settle the 
dust. But there was no water available, and Naropa wondered what to 
do. Tilopa said to him, 'Well, if you punch holes in your body, liquid 
will come out, and you can use that." So Naropa used his own blood to 
make the dust settle. When he was about to make the mandala offering 
there was nothing to give. Tilopa said, 'Why don't you use your own 
fingers and limbs?" Naropa cut them off and offered them as a mandala 
offering. At this point Tilopa asked, "Are you well? Are you feeling all 
right?" Naropa said, "I feel great because I have the incredible fortune 
to make an offering of my flesh and blood." Tilopa said, "The condi­
tioned aggregates of samsara are futile, insubstantial and painful. It is a 
very fortunate disciple who is able to perceive parting with these as 
being a cause of great joy. You are a fortunate person." Then he gave 
Naropa the teaching on bardo. 
Now let's leave the biography and return to the Song of Naropa: the 
View Concisely Put. The first key point put across in this song was that 
all phenomena are mind -that whatever is perceived is mind. Next it 
was explained that this mind is empty. Now we will discuss how this 
emptiness is spontaneously present. Spontaneous presence in this con-
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
text refers to the fact that anything can arise in our mind; anything can 
be experienced. All possible experiences unfold, both pure and impure; 
the impure experiences of samsara and the pure experiences of nirvana. 
That this great potential is spontaneously present in empty mind is in­
deed marvelous and wondrous. Therefore, Naropa begins with emaho, 
an exclamation of wonder and amazement. 
Emaho! 
The creations of this mind essence, while one is still 
defiled, 
The six classes ofbeings, and so forth, 
Extending to the bounds of space, 
Are the magical machinery of suffering, which surpasses 
the grasp of thought. 
When this spontaneously present empty mind is defiled, the impure 
experiences of samsara take place. When this mind is undefiled -not 
covered by coarse conceptual thinking or disturbing emotions -the 
pure experiences of nirvana unfold. At the time this mind essence is 
defiled, its creations take place as the six classes of sentient beings. 
Now, when we speak of the six classes of sentient beings we must 
mention misdeeds and obscurations. Misdeeds refer to negative karma 
created through either thought, word or deed. Obscurations refers to 
the habitual tendencies for disturbing emotions. The disturbing emo­
tions that we are ready to feel at any point and inevitably become en­
gaged in can be either coarse, subtle or latent. Disturbing emotions 
reoccur because of the ingrained habits created through our involve­
ment with them. Although disturbing emotions may be subtle, because 
of these tendencies they can easily manifest on a more coarse level as 
well. 
For instance, when we get irritated and angry we should apply some 
remedy against ill-will, rather than nurturing it. The remedy is based 
on seeing that anger is unwholesome and negative. Once we see that 
anger is a flaw and we apply a remedy to reduce it, it lessens. If we do 
SoNGS oF NAROPA 
not apply an antidote against anger, it proliferates. It can become ex­
pressed in thoughts of wanting to kill or beat up others, of wanting to 
inflict injury. The fully manifested state of anger is what is called the 
hell realms, where one perceives everything as a battleground, a realm 
of murder and violence. 
Likewise, if we use an antidote to reduce the disturbing emotion of 
stinginess or avarice, it diminishes. But if we allow greed to take over 
and run wild, we entertain thoughts like, "I don't have enough, my 
wealth and enjoyments are going to run out. What am I going to do! 
I'll be poor! I'll be hungry! It's so terrible!". When this mental pattern is 
allowed to fully manifest, that is what is called the preta realm, the 
world of the hungry ghost filled with incredibly agonizing hunger and 
thirst. 
The different phenomena for each of the remaining realms of the 
six classes of beings arises similarly. Each occurs when the defilement 
of the different disturbing emotions is permitted to run wild without 
applying any antidote. We go further and further astray into the painful 
realms of samsara. Earlier I mentioned that the essence of mind, the 
natural state, is utterly pure. The problem comes from the fact that our 
minds are temporarily obscured. The fact the mind is utterly pure does 
not exclude the existence of suffering when it is obscured. Although the 
essence is pure, sentient beings covered by obscurations undergo 
innumerable painful experiences. 
While we are enmeshed in this magical machinery of suffering, it is 
necessary to train in the sacred Dharma, particularly in the state of 
profound samadhi. Otherwise this momentary obscuration of samsaric 
states will never end. Even if we want to accomplish only our own 
welfare, we still need to clear up and purify these temporary defile­
ments. Yet honestly, it is not enough to do practice simply for our­
selves. Just as our nature of mind is originally pure and empty, so is the 
nature of mind of all other sentient beings. The essential purity of our 
natures doesn't help us much if we do not realize that. We will simply 
JI 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
continue in samsara, experiencing tremendous, inconceivable and over­
whelming suffering. 
These four lines describe how the spontaneously present quality of 
empty mind allows the impure experiences of samsara to unfold, out of 
the defiled thinking. It is also possible for the pure experiences to un­
fold out of the spontaneously present quality of empty mind when it is 
free from the defilement of thought. When looking into that which 
thinks, we discover that although a thought appears as some entity that 
exists by itself; it is not independent. It is like the movement of a wave 
on the surface of water. As the wave is not separate from the ocean, 
likewise the thought is not separate from the thinker. Milarepa stated, 
"Thoughts are the magical display of mind. Resolve this magical dis­
play. Resolve the nature of mind." What is necessary is to recognize the 
essence of thought, which is unconstructed self-knowing. 
This unconstructed self-knowing itself 
Which is free from the defilement of thought, 
Is the nondwelling nirvana. 
In the Dorje Chang Chenma we recite daily at these teachings, there 
is one sentence that says, "The essence of thought is Dharmakaya, as is 
taught." Even though thought involvement is a defilement, the very 
essence of this thinking -indeed, of any thought -is not different 
from the nature of mind itself. Therefore, the essence of mind is 
Dharmakaya. Thoughts are not something that concretely exists. A 
thought does not have any substantial existence. When looking into 
the very essence of that which thinks, we meet the natural and uncon­
structed awareness. That, itself, is what is called nondwelling nirvana. 
In ordinary usage the word nirvana simply refers to escape from sam­
saric existence. In the context of Vajrayana, however, it is the basic 
state, the nature of mind. 
The Vajra Being is also just this. 
The Sixth Buddha is also just this. 
SoNGs oF NAROPA 
The six families are also just this. 
Manjushri Kumara is just this. 
Vairochana is just this. 
Here the nature of mind is expressed in the form of the buddha 
Vajrasattva, called 'Vajra Being,' the all-encompassing lord who per­
vades all other buddha families. He is also known as 'the Sixth Bud­
dha,' Vajradhara, the dharmakaya buddha who is counted as sixth in 
addition to the five buddha families. In the next line, "The six families 
are also just this,'' means that the five Buddha families and Vajradhara 
are essentially nothing other than the nature of mind itsel£ 
In the next sentence Naropa says, "Manjushri Kumara is just this." 
As I mentioned earlier, the awakened state has three main qualities: 
wisdom, compassion and capability. These three qualities are personi­
fied by the Lords of the Three Families. Thus, the natural form of wis­
dom knowledge is pictured as Manjushri. In his bodhisattva form, he is 
called Manjushri Kumara, which literally means 'youthful, gende 
splendor.' In the development stage Manjushri is depicted as orange­
golden in color, holding a sword in his right hand and a blue lotus 
flower with a scripture in the left hand. Essentially Manjushri repre.,. 
sents nothing other than the nature of mind itself. 
"V airochana is also just this.'' The buddha V airochana is the natural 
form of dharmadhatu wisdom, one of the five wisdoms. Wisdom, lit­
erally 'original wakefulness,' is often described in two aspects: one is 
called "the original wakefulness that cognizes the ultimate,'' and the 
other, "the original wakefulness that perceives the relative." There are 
other attributes to wisdom as well, such as the empty and perceiving 
qualities of original wakefulness. Buddha Vairochana embodies dhar­
madhatu wisdom -the original wakefulness that sees the ultimate 
state of the dhatu, the sphere of all dharmas, all phenomena, exacdy as 
it is. This wisdom has been personified as Vairochana, the central fig­
ure of the mandala of the five Buddhas. Essentially he represents the 
unmistaken view, the nature of mind. 
73 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
Dharmakaya, the great bliss, 
And the state of unity are also just this. 
This itself is the fourth empowerment. 
Innate joy is also just this. 
Natural purity is also just this. 
Dharmakaya is the nature of mind. "Great bliss" in this context 
refers to sambhogakaya, that manifests out of the realized nature of 
mind. "And the state of unity is also just this" means that the unity of 
basic space and original wakefulness, the unity of experience and emp­
tiness, is likewise nothing other than the nature of mind. Vajradhara, 
the six families, Manjushri, V airochana and so forth, all refer more to 
the development stage; whereas dharmakaya and sambhogakaya, as 
great bliss, refer to the ultimate fruition. 
Next, Naropa says, ''This itself is the fourth empowerment." The 
four empowerments are usually called the four ripening empower­
ments. The first of these is the outer abhisheka, the vase empowerment. 
It is given for the purpose of realizing the natural purity of the aggre­
gates and elements. Next is the inner secret empowerment that is given 
in order to realize the natural purity of the channels, energies and es­
sences. The third, the innermost or wisdom-knowledge empowerment, 
allows one by means of samadhi to realize the example wisdom, the 
great bliss of emptiness. The fourth is the ultimate or most supreme 
empowerment, and is often given by means of a symbolic gesture or the 
display of a symbolic implement. For example, the vajra master may 
hold up a crystal, to indicate how the nature of mind actually is. Some­
times he will show a mirror, or allow a reflection to appear in the mir­
ror. Because this fourth empowerment, often known as the word 
empowerment, directly introduces us to the nature of mind itself, it is 
called the most supreme. 
The next sentence is, "Innate joy is also just this", referring to the 
coemergent joy experienced through tummo practice. When beginning 
to train in tummo, we sustain a sense of inner bliss. When stabilized 
74 
SoNGs OF NAROPA 
and intensified, this bliss has four degrees, the fourth of which is called 
innate joy. Innate refers to that which is unproduced. It is not some 
new thing that suddenly dawns, but is a discovering of the natural state 
of mind itself as innate joy. "Natural purity'' means the utterly pure 
nature of mind "is also just this." 
All these and other different indicators 
Known from the sutras and the tantras, 
Are for the 
most part based on this; 
Simply combined with this in whichever way is suitable. 
The first line refers to the different terminologies used in the sutras 
and tantras. Mainly these words used are based on the realization of the 
nature of mind. These names and terms may vary to suit different 
individuals' inclinations. The last line indicates that all these different 
teachings and phrases can be used to link the individual with the nature 
of mind in whichever way is most suitable. The important point is to 
realize the nature of mind.+ 
75 
7 
THESE VAJRAYANA TEACHINGS being presented here are words 
spoken by great masters like Tilopa and N aropa, and are extraor­
dinary and extremely profound. Mter studying the sacred teachings, we 
are able to put them into practice and to eventually attain fruition. 
Remember that in any of these steps, it is the bodhichitta resolve that 
enables us to perfect the path and reach the ultimate destination. 
Therefore, at whatever time, either studying or putting the teachings 
into practice, motivate yourself with the precious resolve towards true 
and complete enlightenment. 
We have arrived at the point where Naropa has undergone the 
twelve minor and twelve major trials, and has received the pith instruc­
tions concerning the paths of ripening and liberation. Tilopa then tells 
him, ''Just remaining like this will not be so beneficial. It is like a blind 
person who cannot see, a deaf person who cannot hear, an idiot who 
can't understand. Something more is necessary." Naropa thought, 
'What is it I need? Maybe I should embark on the action," meaning 
the courageous yogic disciplines. Tilopa responded, "Until you have 
untied the knot of ego-clinging, it won't help to 'enter the action'. 
What you need is the instruction in how to bring forth enhancement." 
After Naropa received the instructions on bringing forth enhance­
ment, he commenced those practices. One day, he and Tilopa went to 
SoNGS oF NAROPA 
the Vikramashila monastery, where Naropa engaged in some Dharma 
discussions. Later he returned to Tilopa who looked quite displeased. 
Tilopa said, "That was not very useful. There was not much benefit in 
that." Naropa asked, 'Well, then, what should I do? Should I go and 
practice in the charnel grounds? Should I become a Dharma teacher? 
What should I do?" Tilopa said, "I think the best results will come 
from relying on the blessings of a qualified master." 'What do you 
mean?" Naropa implored Tilopa didn't say a word. He took out his 
kapala, or skull cup, and heaped it with all sorts of disgusting substan­
ces of different kinds inside. He assembling a whole pile of foul­
smelling stuff, he commanded Naropa, "Eat this. You have to." Since 
Naropa didn't have any choice, he began to eat it. Much to his surprise, 
he discovered not only did it have a fantastic aroma, its taste was 
amazmg. 
After this experience, Naropa thought, "If one doesn't train in 
meditation, then one's emotions become the direct cause for furthering 
samsaric existence. If one does train in meditation, the emotions are 
naturally purified, and the fruition will become the benefit for both self 
and others." He didn't say anything, but Tilopa understood immedi­
ately and said, ''Yes! It's exactly as what you just thought." Mter that 
they both took on the attire of mahasiddhas and began what is called 
entering the action, wandering about living off alms with no fixed aims. 
Naropa would walk around begging, calling out, "Benduria!," which 
means, 'Whatever you give, I will eat and digest!" Some kids heard that 
and wanted to tease him. One of them gave him a knife, gesturing that 
he should eat it. Much to their surprise, Naropa swallowed the knife­
tip first. The children were amazed and the word went around the 
country that Naropa was somebody truly amazing. finally the king of 
that area heard the talk, and wanted to check Naropa out for himself. 
Mounting his elephant he rode out in search of him. 
The elephant arrived in great majesty right in front of Naropa. 
Qyite dignified, Naropa held up his right hand in the menacing mudra, 
and the elephant simply dropped dead right there. The king was quite 
77 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
distressed, because it was a very expensive elephant. The villagers of 
that area were also upset, because a dead elephant is quite difficult to 
get rid of, and once it starts to rot it becomes almost unbearable to live 
in the area. The king asked, 'Who told me to come here to begin 
with?" The reply was ''Your ministers." 'Where did they hear it from?" 
finally the rumor was traced back to the children. The king said, 'Well, 
the children will have to pay for a new elephant." Since it was a very 
rare and expensive type of animal, the children's parents were now also 
very upset. There was no way that they could afford to reimburse the 
king for his dead elephant. Everybody went on agonizing about this 
affair, until one old lady said, ''You don't have to solve this by your­
selves. Why don't you ask the siddha himself? Maybe he will help you." 
They beseeched N aropa and he agreed to lend a hand. first he practiced 
the transference of consciousness, transferring himself into the 
elephant and moving it away from the village. All the villagers were 
quite happy that they didn't have a rotting elephant right next to their 
homes. Next he summoned back the consciousness of the elephant and 
revived it so that it could be given back to the king, who was also 
happy. In this way they were all very pleased, and Naropa was invited 
to return to the Icing's palace. He accepted and stayed on as the object 
of everyone's veneration. 
However, Naropa didn't quite behave as one should in a royal court. 
He acted like a siddha, meaning his behavior was both shocking and 
outrageous. The ministers, the queens, and the other members of the 
royal family all slowly became quite distressed. The other priests living 
at the court were especially infuriated. They supplicated the king, say­
ing, "In the past, Your Majesty has been very wise, but now you are 
housing this crazy person. His behavior is a disgrace to the dignity of 
the royal court." The king didn't do anything, so the priests decided to 
kill N aropa themselves, in secret. They lured him out to a narrow 
gorge, where they confronted him, saying "The way you speak is ob­
noxious. Your behavior is offensive. Now you must die!" Then they tied 
him up with ropes and chains, cut him into pieces and cremated his 
78 
SoNes oF NAROPA 
remains in a big fire until there was nothing left. Yet, the next morning 
they found Naropa sitting right there in samadhi in the middle of the 
fire. 
Incredibly regretful, the priests all apologized. Naropa simply re­
plied, "Don't worry about this at all. Actually it's all been just perfect. 
All the abuse you heaped upon me helped me to train in further patien­
ce. Cutting up my body helped to interrupt the stream of samsaric exis­
tence; and burning my body in the fire helped to burn away disturbing 
emotions." 
Naropa then engaged in the 'child-like conduct,' the behavior that is 
like a child. He would go to the villages and live with the children. 
Sometimes he would cry with them. Sometimes he would laugh. 
Sometimes he would just play around. One time Tilopa happened by 
and said to him, "To engage in the action [meaning yogic discipline] 
without the permission of your guru or the dakini is not appropriate. 
You shouldn't do that." Naropa asked, 'What should I do instead? 
Should I request more teachings?" Tilopa said, "To request teaching 
after teaching is like drinking water from the ocean -the more you 
drink, the more thirsty you get. You'll never end this craving." Naropa 
again asked, 'What should I do? Should I just try to reflect on the 
teachings?" Tilopa answered, ''The more you think about the teachings, 
the more you envelop yourself in the web of concepts." 'Well, should I 
practice more meditation?," Naropa asked. Tilopa replied, 'What is the 
use of meditation practice if you haven't left attachment behind?" At 
his wit's end, Naropa begged, 'What should I do?" 
In reply, Tilopa sang a song which said something like this: "All 
that you experience is dependent origination. Dependent origination is 
non-arising. It is emptiness. Until you realize the unity of dependent 
origination and emptiness, don't ever separate yourself from gathering 
the accumulations of merit and wisdom. Non-attachment is most 
important. Attachment to even the tiniest thing is like a fly stuck on 
glue. Whatever you do, be totally free from attachment." 
79 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
Tilopa then told Naropa, "You must go to Pullahari and reside 
there. In the future, you will have a disciple called Mati. Accept him as 
your student and dispel his darkness." In this way Tilopa predicted the 
coming of the Tibetan translator Marpa, one of whose names is Lodro, 
the Tibetan for 'Mati'. 
Now we return to the song. We have now reached the fourth of the 
song's four topics, which shows that this spontaneous presence is self­
liberated. In the former chapters I have explained how mind is essen­
tially empty, and how this empty mind facilitates the unfolding of all 
experience, both pure and impure. I have explained how defiled mind 
gives rise to impure experience, such as unceasing samsara and the 
different unbearable sufferings of the six classes of sentient beings. Un­
defiled mind gives rise to nirvana, buddhahood with all its qualities. 
This unfolding of pure experience happens automatically, in that it 
spontaneously manifests. When we have fully realized this spontaneous 
presence of the nature of mind, it is self-liberated. To express the won­
drous quality of this, Naropa again starts with "Emaho!". 
Emaho! 
The creations of this undefiled mind essence, 
What comprises the kayas of form: 
The buddhafields of utter purity, 
The magically created mandalas, and so forth -
All these creations of great wonder -
Appear, extending to the bounds of space. 
"This undefiled mind essence" means the mind essence that is, in 
itself, free of any stain. Defilement does not have to be deliberately cast 
away to recognize that the nature of mind is originally empty. In the 
very moment of recognizing the nature of mind, defilement is self­
liberated; it simply vanishes. This is also called realizing the nature of 
dharmakaya. 
The recognition of the empty essence, the ability to experience the 
nature of mind exacdy as it is, is called dharmadhatu wisdom. It is 
So 
SoNGs oF NAROPA 
knowing the sphere of the innate nature of things. Through realizing 
the nature of mind to be empty in itself, we automatically arrive at the 
understanding that all phenomena are devoid of any self-nature what­
soever. This seeing the nature of both mind and phenomena exactly as 
it is is called dharmadhatu wisdom, one of the five wisdoms. 
Is this state of dharmadhatu wisdom, the basic space of all things, 
an empty, blank voidness? No, it isn't. It is a basic space in which any 
form of experience can unfold unobstructedly. Whatever takes place, 
whatever is perceived, is seen as being indivisible from basic space it­
self. Therefore, no experience is conceptualized of as being 'good' and 
preferable, nor is anything seen as 'bad' and rejectable. Everything is 
seen as being of equal nature. This is what is called the wisdom of 
equality. 
If both the ultimate and relative are experienced as being of equal 
nature, does this mean that everything is somehow mixed together and 
indistinguishable? No, it is not. Everything that is perceived arises 
clearly and exactly as it is, as unblurred and as distinct as an exact 
reflection in a mirror. This is what is called the mirror-like wisdom. 
These first three aspects -dharmadhatu wisdom, the wisdom of 
equality and the mirror-like wisdom -are predominantly aspects of 
seeing the ultimate. This doesn't mean that a buddha who arrives at the 
sphere of the innate nature is totally blind to what takes place on the 
relative level. A further aspect of the clarity described by the mirror-like 
wisdom is to see every single thing unmixed and individually, exactly as 
it is. This is discriminating wisdom, or literally, the wakefulness that 
differentiates things individually. 
There is one final aspect: an unobstructed activity that works for the 
benefit of beings in a manner that is always timely and perfectly ap­
propriate. This perfect knowing of what needs to be carried out for the 
benefit of others is called the all-accomplishing wisdom. The awakened 
state of the buddhas is endowed with all five of these aspects of wis­
dom. 
Sr 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
Looking further into this subject, can one benefit beings by simply 
knowing what they need? No, one can't. Activity must also manifest for 
the welfare of others. This activity takes form as the magical creations 
comprised of the kayas of form, the rupakayas, which for pure beings 
manifest as the sambhogakayas and for impure beings manifest as the 
nirmanakayas. These manifestations are what carry out the four activi­
ties [of pacifying, increasing, magnetizing, and subjugating]. 
Briefly described, the sambhogakayas are the buddhafields of utter 
purity and the magically created mandalas. All these manifest out of 
the awakened state of dharmakaya. These sambhogakaya realms of 
utter purity are traditionally described in terms of the five certainties. 
The certainty of place is a pure sambhogakaya buddhafield. The certainty 
of retinue covers the entourages of a buddha, which is made up of 
bodhisattvas at the level of the tenth bhumi. The certainty of the teacher 
expresses the extraordinary form of the sambhogakaya. The certainty of 
teaching means that these teachings are unlike those given by a nirma­
nakaya buddha in this world ofimpure beings. Normally, these contain 
teachings on both the expedient and the definitive meaning. But the 
retinues that receive teaching in the sambhogakaya realms are exclu­
sively bodhisattvas on the ten bhumis who perceive the innate nature of 
suchness. The teachings given to thern thus deal exclusively with the 
definitive meaning. finally, there is the certainty of time. In our world, a 
supreme nirmanakaya appears only occasionally, but in the sambhoga­
kaya realm, there is a continuous expounding of the definitive meaning 
of the Dharma. 
In addition to these sambhogakaya manifestations, there are many 
other wondrous magical creations of the awakened state. These include 
the supreme nirmanakaya, like Buddha Shakyamuni, who appeared in 
this world and turned the three consecutive wheels of the Dharma. 
They also encompass other types of nirmanakaya called incarnated and 
variegated nirmanakayas. All these marvelous creations manifest to the 
furthest reaches of space, connecting an infinite number of sentient 
beings with the Dharma, who become established within it and are led 
SONGS OF NAROPA 
to the state of liberation. Next, Naropa brings up what happens when 
we fail to realize the correct view. He explains what it is to be in error, 
and to have only a partial understanding of the correct view. 
The non-Buddhist Tirthikas, 
In their ignorance of mind itself, 
Are submerged in an ocean of erroneous philosophy 
Involving a self, a supreme godhead, and the like. 
When we don't understand the correct view, we are deluded. 'View' 
here means knowing the actual, true nature of this empty, cognizant 
mind. When we are deluded, we give rise to all kinds of erroneous con­
ceptions about what really is. For instance, Naropa mentions the non­
Buddhist philosophers who he describes as being ignorant of mind 
itsel£ They are, he says, submerged in an ocean of erroneous philoso­
phy of a sel£ They attach existence to a spirit or a self, to that which is 
conscious and aware. They believe it to be a concrete, real thing. They 
may posit that the individual identity is a material substance, or assert 
that there is a mind to be identified. 
As another example, take the non-Buddhist philosophy called the 
Samkhya. Its followers do not understand that all experience is a magi­
cal creation of the empty cognizant mind. Instead, they assert that 
there is a supreme godhead characterized by five attributes. The god­
head is the source or projector of the experiences of sentient beings. 
This system lacks any comprehension of the nature of samsaric exis­
tence and the possibility of transcending it. As Naropa says, its follow­
ers are adrift in an ocean of erroneous philosophy. 
The schools of our like, such as the shravakas, 
The pratyekabuddhas, and the followers ofMind Only, 
Maintain the duality of perceiver and perceived, 
And conceptualize nonduality as being the true. 
Shravakas and pratyekabuddhas, both Hinayana schools, maintain 
that both the perceiver (the perceiving mind) and the perceived- the 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
perceived objects- both have ultimate existence in some form. Fol­
lowers of the Mind-Only school understand that both the perceiver 
and the perceived are insubstantial, yet they still hold onto the concept 
of the wisdom that is a non-dual state of knowing as a true, ultimate 
entity. 
Moreover, they get caught in the web of concepts 
Such as whether the perceived is real or false. 
Here Naropa is further discussing the view of the Mind-Only 
school. There is some difference within this school with regard to the 
reality of objects, meaning the content of experience. Some hold that 
the perceived is real in that it is experienced. Another group asserts that 
whatever is perceived is utterly empty, and is thus false and unreal. 
Mter all, whether one regards the content of experience to be real or 
unreal, one may still fail to see that which experiences as being totally 
empty of a self-nature. The Mind-Only school apprehends the perceiv­
ing mind as having some substantial existence. It's this clinging to a 
concept of non-dual knowing which prevents Mind-Only followers 
from reaching the ultimate destination of the path. Due to this subtle 
conceptual attachment, they are unable to attain true and complete 
enlightenment within this very same body and life.+ 
8 
N OW J WILL FINISH THE LIFE STORY OF NAROPA. After he received 
Tilopa's prophecy regarding his future disciples, including the 
Tibetan translator Marpa Lotsawa, N aropa felt extremely fortunate. He 
had met a qualified master and received the authentic instructions. 
True realization had sprung forth within his stream of being. He had 
such confidence that even if he met with the thousand buddhas of this 
aeon, he felt there would be nothing he needed to ask or clear up. After 
this he was extremely delighted! He left Tilopa to go wander aimlessly, 
without any fixed abode. Two other disciples of Tilopa, Riripa and 
Kasoripa, went to pay their respects to Tilopa and Naropa. finding 
N aropa nowhere to be found, they asked Tilopa, 'Where has N aropa 
gone?" Tilopa answered, "He has reached accomplishment in Maha­
mudra and has left for unknown places." These two disciples were 
themselves accomplished masters. They said to Tilopa, "The two of us 
are Dharma friends with Naropa. Naropa is like a second Buddha, to­
tally unrivaled by anyone. If he disappears and does not vigorously 
work for the benefit of beings, the activity of the Buddha will be inter­
rupted." Tilopa said, 'Well, if that is so, you can call him back." So the 
pair set out to search for him, and after a long journey they finally 
found him sitting in meditation in an empty valley. They told him, 
"Tilopa told us to call you." Naropa said, "If Tilopa commands me to 
ss 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
do so, I will come," and he got up from his meditation and returned 
with them. 
Meeting Tilopa again, Naropa was told, "Since you have realized 
the natural state of nonarising awareness, the time has come for you to 
shower the rain of the Dharma on fortunate disciples by bringing them 
to maturation." His friend Riripa added, "If you remain alone in soli­
tude, you will look like a shravaka." And Kasoripa said, "The time has 
come for you to dispense the medicine of the sacred Dharma to beings 
who are affiicted by the illness of suffering." 
Naropa prostrated to Tilopa and said, "I accept what the vajra mas­
ter and my vajra brothers ask me to do. I will teach all sentient beings 
without any prejudice whatsoever." Naropa went and stayed at Pulla­
hari, where he had a vision of Chakrasamvara. In it he received a pre­
diction that he would soon meet with a destined and worthy disciple, 
who would come from Tibet to eastern India. Naropa sent out one of 
his disciples, called Getsul Sherab, to find this disciple and bring him 
back. And this is how Marpa met Naropa. 
That concludes the life story of Naropa. Now let's return to 
Naropa's song. I have covered the fourth point, on how the spontane­
ously present quality is self-liberated. Unless we realize that, we are in 
delusion. Whether we follow a non-Buddhist philosophy or a Buddhist 
system, until we truly recognize the natural state as it is, we will still be 
caught in the web of concepts. If we understand the natural state of 
mind exactly as it is, both the meditation training and the conduct will 
be correct. 
By not mistaking the view in this way, 
You attain enlightenment through the meditation 
training and conduct, 
That are in harmony with the real, 
Just like a well-trained race horse. 
The first line means to not be like a non-Buddhist philosopher, or 
like the shravakas, the pratyekabuddhas and the Mind Only followers. 
86 
SoNGS oF NAROPA 
A mistaken view prevents us from reaching the level of V ajradhara in 
one body and lifetime. It is necessary to ascertain the correct view, as 
explained previously. 
In Buddhism there are two approaches to a correct view: one makes 
use of inference, while the other uses direct perception, or 'seeing in 
actuality.' The view of Mahamudra uses the second approach, the see­
ing in actuality. In the Sutra system, one arrives at a correct view by 
means of inference, using intelligent reasoning. This is also true of sev­
eral Mahayana schools. For instance, the Middle-Way school called 
Rangtong establishes the emptiness of all things by exposing their lack 
of self-nature, first by intellectual comprehension and then by attaining 
complete certainty. Since things are in fact devoid of a self-nature, the 
Rangtong understanding is a correct view. The other Madhyamika 
school, the Shentong system, uses inference to establish certainty in how 
the natural state of all things is the nondual wisdom of emptiness and 
cognizance. This is also a correct view. 
Despite their philosophical correctness, these Middle Way schools 
are not especially practical for training in Mahamudra because their 
views are intellectual assumptions, the products of inference. In the 
Sutra system before reaching true and complete enlightenment one 
must perfect the accumulations of merit and wisdom for an incredibly 
long time. The reason why it is a longer path is because the Sutra sys­
tem takes inference as the path. Sooner or later, we must all proceed to 
'seeing in actuality.' 
Mahamudra training involves embracing direct perception. We do 
start out with scrutinizing the nature of mind, but not as a conceptual 
idea or an object of philosophical speculation. Rather, we look into the 
mind to see how it is in actuality, and we see that its nature is an origi­
nal wakefulness in which emptiness and cognizance are indivisible. 
Because we are seeing directly rather than inferring, Mahamudra is su­
perior. It is truly an unerring and extraordinary view. The meditation 
training which comes from applying this true and correct view will also 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
be profound and extraordinary, unlike meditation based on inferior 
VIews. 
When a view is unmistaken, the training in that will be unmistaken 
as well. And our conduct, our acting upon that view, will be equally 
unmistaken. When we train in the correct view of Mahamudra, the 
disturbing emotions and other flaws present within our stream of being 
will automatically subside. In addition, the good qualities present, the 
intrinsic qualities of original wakefulness -like loving kindness and 
compassion -will spontaneously increase. All this is possible only 
when the training is unmistaken, and unmistaken training is possible 
only when the view is unmistaken. What is an unmistaken view? It is 
in harmony with the real, meaning with the natural state. When the 
view is correct, the training and behavior will also be correct or in har­
mony with the real. 
By keeping a view, meditation training and conduct that is in har­
mony with the real, we will definitely arrive at enlightenment. Naropa 
shows us the necessity of applying the correct view with the analogy of 
a fully trained racehorse. A well-trained and well-bred horse will take 
an experienced rider to wherever he or she intends to go. There will not 
be any sidetracks or stumbles at any point on the way. The rider will 
safely and easily arrive at the desired destination. Arriving at enlight­
enment through a correct view, meditation and conduct is like riding a 
well-trained horse. 
A great number of practitioners in the past attained accomplish­
ment by training in this unmistaken view. Many of them departed from 
this life to celestial realms without leaving an ordinary corpse behind. 
There have been a great number of practitioners who left in the rain­
bow body. How is such mastery achieved? Again, true accomplishment 
is based on the unmistaken, correct view, which is exacdy what Naropa 
presents i~ this song. 
Unless you are in harmony with the real view, 
Your meditation training and conduct will be mistaken 
And you will not attain fruition, 
88 
SoNGs oF NAROPA 
Like a blind man without a guide. 
On the other hand, to practice a view that is not in harmony with 
what is real will result in mistaken training and behavior. The outcome 
will not be what we intended. Take the example of the non-Buddhist 
philosophers who impute the erroneous existence of an independent 
self or a supreme godhead. Practice based on this kind of assertion does 
not facilitate the realization of what is real-egolessness and empti­
ness. It is certainly possible to accumulate some merit based on the 
false ideas of self and a godhead. However, that merit only ripens as a 
rebirth with the pleasures of the higher realms within samsara. Realiz­
ing egolessness is the only actual remedy against disturbing emotions. 
Without realizing emptiness, we are unable to cut the root of disturb­
ing emotions. Without cutting the root of disturbing emotions, true 
liberation is a "Mission: Impossible". So let me repeat again: if the view 
is not correct and true, our meditation training, conduct and fruition 
are also mistaken. 
Among the Buddhist schools, the views of shravakas and pratyeka­
buddhas are said to be partially correct or incomplete, in the sense that 
they do not fully see emptiness, nor realize the natural state to be empty 
cognizance. For instance, the shravaka view of emptiness is limited to 
an understanding of egolessness, the non-existence of the individual 
sel£ Lacking the complete view, the shravakas' meditation training is 
also incomplete, as is the conduct and fruition. By following the shra­
vaka path, one can eliminate the obscuration of disturbing emotions, 
but the cognitive obscuration remains. The end result achieved by 
training in egolessness and emphasizing impermanence is called the 
shravaka arhat level. 
The pratyekabuddhas, on the other hand, understand the non-exist­
ence of the self-entity of phenomena to some extent, in that they 
understand that perceived objects have no ultimate existence. Based on 
this view, they achieve the pratyekabuddha arhat level; but they are 
unable to attain the ultimate fruition of complete enlightenment. 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
Among the Mahayana schools, followers of the Mind-Only and the 
Middle Way realize the correct view, but this realization is also in­
complete. Mind-Only followers comprehend that all experience is 
mind. However, they still hold that this mind truly exists. The Middle 
Way view, though correct, is arrived at based on an inferred idea of 
emptiness. And it is not possible to attain complete enlightenment in a 
single body and lifetime by training in an idea that is created through 
inference. 
To reiterate, non-Buddhist philosophers with mistaken views are 
incapable of accomplishing fruition through their training because their 
view is not in harmony with what is real. The shravakas and pratyeka­
buddhas do attain liberation from samsara, but because their view is 
only partially true they cannot attain complete enlightenment. Follow­
ers of the Mahayana schools of Mind-Only and Middle Way can attain 
complete enlightenment because their view is basically correct, but 
because it is an inference, they cannot attain this state very quickly. 
The crucial point that everything depends upon is whether or not 
the view is perfect and complete. No matter how much effort you 
might make by training in an incorrect view, a false assumption will 
never be in harmony with reality. The outcome of one's training cannot 
be anything other than what has been trained in. In other words, if the 
view is not truly and fully in accordance with the natural state of all 
things, the result of training in it will also be imperfect. The analogy 
used for the wrong view here is that of a blind person left alone on a 
vast plain. Unable to see clearly, he will inevitably take the wrong track 
and will not reach his desired destination. 
How can my conceptual mind, [limited in its 
perceptions] like a frog in a well, 
Discover the profundity by stirring up 
The ocean-like depth of the true meaning! 
May all learned masters forgive my errors! 
SoNGS OF NAROPA 
Now we are nearing the end of the text. Here Naropa apologizes for 
any faults he might have made in writing this. 'The true meaning' 
mentioned here is the truth of what is real, the nature of all things. 
This is the state of Mahamudra, which is extremely vast and profound. 
The realization of that, the fruition, is equally vast and profound, like 
an ocean. Naropa humbly compares his intellect, his conceptual mind, 
with that of a frog living in a well. The frog, with its narrow perspec­
tive and confined horizon, knows the size of the well and the depth of 
its water. However, it is unable to fully fathom the depth and the vast­
ness of the ocean. 
When he writes 'Stirring up the ocean-like depth of true meaning' 
Naropa means that a narrow little mind like his own is incapable of 
measuring the true depth of Mahamudra, the nature of all things. 
Naropa apologizes for any faults that may have occurred in attempting 
to express it. He indicates here that his conceptual understanding of 
the nature of Mahamudra doesn't approach the true reality of how 
Mahamudra actually is. Even his actual, direct understanding of 
Mahamudra may not be complete. And even if he does possess a com­
plete understanding of Mahamudra he acknowledges he may lack the 
clarity to express it fully. Thus he begs forgiveness from all learned 
masters for any shortcoming he may have committed. 
These four lines sound like a simple apology by Naropa. Indirectly, 
though, they contain advice and instruction for us. We want to train in 
Mahamudra and are interested in receiving teachings on it. But we 
should be cautious because we are ordinary people with a weakness for 
becoming conceited at the slightest sign of progress. We enthusiasti­
cally congratulate ourselves at the tiniest attainment, and when we be­
come even a little stable in our meditation state, we immediately feel, 
"Now I've really gotten somewhere! I've reached some accomplish­
ment!" That kind of conceit automatically puts development on hold. It 
is just like pushing the pause button on a tape recorder. If we check 
closely, we can discover for ourselves how such pride hampers progress. 
N aropa teaches us by example that we should consider ourselves to be 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
like frogs in a well. There is no reason to be proud about minor prog­
ress in practice. Much better to understand that we have not yet com­
pleted the path and still have a long way to go. Use slight advances in 
practice to inspire you to work harder, cultivating the attitude "I must 
meditate! I must train further, because I have not reached complete 
enlightenment!" By doing this, we can advance further. 
It is of course very beneficial to be interested in Mahamudra. It is an 
extremely great blessing to be able to receive the instructions and to 
practice. There are indeed extraordinary results and signs of the path, 
but experiencing small indications of progress doesn't mean that we 
should stop there and feel satisfied with ourselves. On the contrary, we 
should understand that they are just signs. Remind yourself, "The in­
structions are profound and effective, but I will persevere with fortitude 
until reaching complete and true enlightenment. Not only will I train 
in Mahamudra but also in devotion and compassion. The time has not 
arrived to stop the practice. I shouldn't feel proud." Heed the inner 
advice in these four lines. 
Through whatever goodness there is from writing this 
May the stain of delusion be fully cleared away 
In fortunate and worthy beings, 
And may the knowledge of realization grow forth! 
In these last four lines, Naropa dedicates the merit generated by the 
writing of this song and makes aspirations. The View, Concisely Put is, 
exactly as the title implies, a concise expression of the view of Maha­
mudra. Merit is created not only by writing this but by studying it, by 
trying to understand and put this text into practice. Because this song 
has survived and has been handed down to the present day, teachings 
can be given and individuals can increase their understanding and 
progress in training. An inconceivable amount of beneficial activity can 
unfold, based on Naropa having written this song. He makes the wish 
that all that goodness be dedicated so that fortunate and worthy beings 
will be able to receive, understand and put these teachings into practice. 
SoNGS OF NAROPA 
It is through the accumulation of vast merit that we come into contact 
with the words of the Victorious Ones. Most especially, among the 
expedient and the definitive meaning, only extremely fortunate people 
are able to connect with, receive and understand teachings on the 
definitive meaning such as The View, Concisely Put. In addition to 
receiving it, if we are practitioners who are willing to persevere and 
train with fortitude, we can truly be called worthy people. 
Naropa continues to wish that the stain of delusion, which is the 
exact opposite of understanding the true view, may be cleared away. 
May the defilement of not being able to train correctly in meditation, 
and the shortcoming of not truly being able to enact the correct view, 
both be cleared away! Naropa makes the aspiration that, having 
cleansed the stain of delusion, the knowledge of realization may grow 
forth. How incredibly wonderful and auspicious to meet a teaching like 
this! Naropa adds to these blessings by sealing it with the aspiration 
that whoever connects with it will attain realization. 
This completes The View, Concisely Put by N aropa. 
In the presence of the pandita J nana Siddhi, this was 
translated and corrected by the lotsawa Marpa Chokyi 
Lodro. 
The text ends with the remark that in the presence of the Pandita 
Jnana Siddhi, one ofNaropa's names, this teaching was translated into 
Tibetan and then corrected by the Tibetan translator Marpa Chokyi 
Lodro. 
To conclude, let me say that I am very pleased by your interest in 
this teaching. Having received it, please put it into practice by applying 
it in your meditation training. Be aware also that there could be some 
negative effect from the profundity of this song, in that the emphasis 
on the view may seem to preclude the importance of proper conduct in 
daily life. The view of Mahamudra is a high one, and there is always 
the danger that we may neglect the importance of appropriate behavior 
93 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
and act in a crude way. That is not what is truly meant. Follow what 
Tilopa advised, in the quotation I mentioned earlier: "Until you fully 
realize the dependent origination of all experience, do not separate 
yourself from the chariot of the two accumulations." While training in 
a high view, please conduct yourself in accordance with the Dharma, 
gathering the accumulations and purifying the obscurations. 
Let's dedicate whatever merit we accumulated from studying, 
teaching and practicing The View, Concisely Put to the purpose of all 
sentient beings fully comprehending the view of Mahamudra. May we 
realize the view ofMahamudra, perfect the training in it and attain true 
and complete enlightenment!+ 
94 
The Summary of 
Mahamudra 

The Summary of 
Mahamudra 
In the Indian language: Mahamudra Padametha. 
In Tibetan: phyag rgya chen po tshig bsdus pa, 
[Chagya Chenpo Tsig Dupa]. 
In English: The Summary of Mahamudra. 
Homage to the state of great bliss! 
first, stating the nature of the Mahamudra ofperception: 
Concerning what is called Mahamudra: 
All things are your own mind. 
Seeing objects as external is a mistaken concept; 
Like a dream, they are empty of concreteness. 
Second, stating the nature of the Mahamudra of awareness: 
This mind, as well, is a mere movement of attention 
That has no self-nature, being merely like a gust of 
wind. 
Empty of identity, like space, 
All things, like space, are equal. 
Third, stating the nature of the Mahamudra of union: 
97 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
When speaking of 'Mahamudra,' 
It is not an identity that can be shown. 
Therefore the mind's suchness 
Is itself the state ofMahamudra. 
Thus he taught the Mahamudra of the view through the three­
fold perception, awareness and union. Next, among the three points 
on the Mahamudra ofmeditation,jirst stating the nature of the Ma­
hamudra of the basic state: 
It is neither something to be corrected nor transformed, 
But when anyone sees and realizes its nature 
All that appears and exists is Mahamudra, 
The great and all-encompassing dharmakaya. 
Second, stating the nature of the Mahamudra of realization: 
Naturally and without contriving, allowed to simply be, 
This unimagined dharmakaya, 
Letting it be without seeking is the meditation training. 
But to meditate while seeking is deluded mind. 
Third, stating the nature of the Mahamudra of indivisibility: 
Just as with space, just as with a magical display, 
While neither cultivating nor not cultivating 
How can you be separate or not separate! 
This is a yogi's understanding. 
Once more, for the three points about the Mahamudra of con-
duct,jirst, stating the nature of the Mahamudra ofse!f-liberation: 
All the good deeds and harmful actions 
Dissolve by simply knowing this nature. 
The emotions are the great wisdom; 
Like a jungle fire, they are the yogi's helpers. 
Second, stating the nature of the Mahamudra of equal taste: 
SoNGS OF NAROPA 
How can there be staying or going? 
What meditation is there by fleeing to a hermitage? 
Without understanding this, all possible means 
Never bring more than temporary liberation. 
Third, stating the nature of the Mahamudra of indivisibility: 
When understanding this nature, what is there to bind 
you? 
While being undistracted from its continuity, 
There is neither a composed nor an uncomposed state 
To be cultivated or corrected with a remedy. 
Once more, for the three points about the Mahamudra of frui­
tion, first, stating the nature of the Mahamudra of what appears and 
exists: 
It is not made out of anything. 
Experience self-liberated is dharmadhatu. 
Thinking self-liberated is great wisdom. 
Nondual equality is dharmakaya. 
Second, stating the nature of the Mahamudra of samsara and 
ntrvana: 
Like the continuous flow of a great river, 
Whatever you do is meaningful. 
This is the eternal awakened state, 
The great bliss, leaving no place for samsara. 
Third, stating the nature of Mahamudra of ultimate pe7:foction: 
All things are empty of their own identities. 
The concept fixed on emptiness has dissolved in itself. 
Free of concept, holding nothing in mind; 
Is in itself the path of all buddhas. 
99 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
To conclude, instructing and stating the dedication: 
For the most fortunate ones, 
I have made these concise words of heartfelt advice. 
Through this, may every single sentient being 
Be established in Mahamudra. 
This was given orally by the great pandita Naropa, to Marpa 
Chokyi Lodro at Pullahari. 
These thirteen verses that concisely show Mahamudra in com­
pleteness were divided up in accordance with their meaning. The 
details should be known from oral teachings. Do not fix your mind on 
other variations; since this is copied from the old manuscripts, I feel it 
should not be changed. 
(This note was added by Shamar Kacho Wangpo. There is a 
saying that "The pith instructions in Mahamudra should be known 
from an instruction in concise words." It is the opinion of all past sub­
lime masters who upheld the Practice Lineage that this teaching 
summarizes all the key points ofMahamudra instruction.)+ 
100 
9 
THE NEXT TEXT BY NAROPA is called The Summary of Mahamudra. 
It is very short and thus not difficult to learn by heart. Nor is it 
difficult to practice, to understand and to apply. As a matter of fact, this 
is exactly how it was meant to be. Naropa wrote this with the thought 
of future generations in mind., offering it with the aspiration that they 
would understand, memorize and apply this teaching. This brief text is 
truly profound, for it contains all the key points of the view, 
meditation, conduct and fruition ofMahamudra. 
To repeat a bit about the life ofNaropa: before Naropa met Tilopa 
he was already a great pandita. Although he was incredibly learned, he 
was not satisfied with his intellectual knowledge. He set out to search 
for a master who could give him the profound pith instructions. 
Naropa suffered tremendous hardships in trying to find Tilopa, and 
even after he encountered Tilopa and was accepted as his disciple, he 
underwent unimaginable trials trying to receive instructions. finally he 
succeeded in obtaining the pith teachings from Tilopa. Among these 
extraordinary instructions were the teachings on Mahamudra, which he 
put into practice. He trained in them and attained complete realization 
of Mahamudra. Later on, he taught Mahamudra, often by using The 
Summary of Mahamudra. 
101 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
Lord Buddha taught the Dharma in a way that was adapted to the 
mental capacity of his listeners. He taught beginners how to practice in 
a gradual fashion so that they could start at whatever level they hap­
pened to be at and progress step by step. When the Buddha turned the 
Wheel of the first set of teachings, he focused on the Four Noble 
Truths. The first Noble Truth is the truth of suffering, which we 
should all be able to easily understand. The second is that suffering has 
a cause, which is karmic actions and disturbing emotions. The third 
Noble Truth is that suffering can be brought to an end; and the fourth 
describes the way that leads to the cessation of suffering, called the 
path. In order to help beginners actually applying the teachings, the 
Lord Buddha began by introducing egolessness, the absence of the 
individual self. 
It is a fact that ordinary sentient beings do suffer. They have prob­
lems and troubles, hardships and grief. Most of this suffering takes 
place in the realm of thought. The most difficult and troublesome 
thoughts are disturbing emotions. One of the main disturbing emo­
tions is anger, or a hostile frame of mind. Out of this anger, we may 
use harsh words or act out physically, throwing or breaking something 
or hitting someone. Sometimes our negative actions are motivated by 
attachment or greed. Other times they come from ignorance, indeci­
sion, or being unclear, stupid or deluded. Sometimes we feel conceited 
or proud, sometimes jealous or competitive. So, do you understand the 
sequence of events? first, disturbing emotions occupy our minds, 
making us unsettled. Next, we express them through words, complicat­
ing matters. The worst situation is when we physically act out these 
unhealthy thought patterns. Disturbing emotions create a tremendous 
amount of problems, for ourselves and others. All of these disturbing 
emotions are based on ego-clinging -the feeling "Me, I am the most 
important." Once we understand this point clearly, we may decide to 
consciously do the opposite, saying to ourselves: "I will no longer con­
sider myself important." Unfortunately, this doesn't solve the problem. 
Merely thinking "I shouldn't behave like that" is not in itself a direct 
I02 
SoNGS oF NAROPA 
remedy against ego-clinging. A thought cannot eliminate the concept 
of self. 
Previously I mentioned relative bodhichitta as a way to reduce dis­
turbing emotions. By shifting our attitude away from selfishness and 
aspiring to help others. disturbing emotions can be reduced. This type 
of training diminishes their strength, but it doesn't totally uproot them. 
That is why that type ofbodhichitta is called 'relative' or superficial. It 
only decreases disturbing emotions, but does not bring them to an end. 
Ultimate bodhichitta, on the other hand, brings disturbing emo­
tions to a permanent end. If we are introduced to and become certain 
about the nature of our mind, we can fully understand that there is no 
such thing as a self. Without carefully investigating, however, we tend 
to believe in the existence of a self. We're not very clear on exactly what 
constitutes 'myself,' assigning that term to all sorts of different things 
-our body, our consciousness, or some unclear mixture of these fac­
tors. We must practice to the point that we become clear on the fact 
that whatever the word 'me' refers to, this object is not to be found 
anywhere at all. first we must learn to look for this 'me.' Next, we need 
to become completely certain that there is no such thing as an I or a 
self. At that point, the very basis for disturbing emotions and selfish­
ness is totally eliminated from the very root. 
This is why the Buddha taught in his very first set of teachings how 
we can cultivate insight into egolessness. In the second set of teachings, 
the Buddha went even further. He taught that it is not only the indivi­
dual self that is non-existent. Everything, all phenomena, all objects, as 
well as consciousness itself, is devoid of any true identity. All things 
have the nature of emptiness. Discovering this for ourselves changes 
our perspective. When we fully actualize emptiness, we are no longer 
obstructed by anything. Our minds are able to remain at great peace, at 
total ease. This is a wider or more expansive insight than that of simply 
realizing egolessness. 
The understanding that all things are emptiness is entirely correct. 
However, we might misconstrue the meaning of emptiness to mean 
103 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
nothingness, a complete voidness. This misunderstanding fixates on 
the thought that all things are a blank, nothing whatsoever, which is 
not correct. To remedy this, the Buddha taught that not only is the 
identity of all things utterly empty; it is emptiness itsel£ This empti­
ness, by nature, has the capacity to know, to experience, to cognize. 
That is the wakeful wisdom quality which is indivisible from emptiness 
itsel£ This is the intent of the third set of teachings, the final turning 
of the Wheel of Dharma. 
The great master Naropa expresses the view of Mahamudra under 
three headings. The first is called stating the nature of the Mahamudra 
of perception. The second is stating the nature of the Mahamudra of 
awareness. The third is stating the nature of the Mahamudra of union. 
first, stating the nature of the Mahamudra ofperception: 
Concerning what is called Mahamudra: 
All things are your own mind. 
Seeing objects as external is a mistaken concept; 
Like a dream, they are empty of concreteness. 
What does it mean when we use the word Mahamudra? What is it 
that we are talking about? What does this term refer to? What is 
Mahamudra about? This verse introduces the nature of the Maha­
mudra of perception. Actually, what is it that we as sentient beings 
perceive? I discussed this topic briefly when explaining the first song, 
and will now go into it in more detail. Through what is called the eye 
consciousness, we perceive visual objects and see sights. Because we 
have the capacity to hear through our ears, the ear consciousness, we 
hear sounds. We have the capacity to taste with our tongues, which is 
called the tongue consciousness. Through our nose consciousness we 
can experience smell, and through our body consciousness we can 
touch. In general Buddhist terminology these are labeled the five sense 
consciousnesses, or the five sense cognitions. The mind experiences the 
world through these five senses. However, our mind consciousness 
itself does not experience sights, smells, sounds, tastes or textures 
104 
SoNGS OF NAROPA 
directly. What is being perceived is a mental impression of these 
experiences. Based on that mental image, we create secondary thoughts 
about past, present, and future. We determine what we like and don't 
like, what should be accepted or rejected. That activity is named the 
sixth consciousness. Sometimes it is called the ideational consciousness; 
other times simply mind consciousness. Thus there are six 
consciousnesses altogether. 
The term "all things" refers not only to mental objects but to the 
objects of all six consciousnesses -sights, sounds, smell, taste, and 
textures, as well as mental objects. What is normally being experienced 
is an impression or an image that takes place in the mind. Not knowing 
this, we tend to believe, for example, that when the object of the eye 
consciousness is presented to the mind, that this perceived object is 
somewhere outside. It is apprehended as being outside of ourselves; and 
the perceiver, the mind, is considered to be somewhere inside. 
Likewise, whatever quality we attach to these perceived objects as being 
either pleasant or unpleasant, good or bad, is similarly apprehended as a 
'real' entity that exists outside of ourselves. 
This is how it seems to be, in that this is how we normally perceive. 
But is this the real state of things? No, it isn't, because it only seems 
like what we see is outside. Actually, what we experience is an 
impression that arises in or exists in our own mind. Whether it's 
something that is seen, heard, smelled, tasted or felt physically, all these 
impressions or perceptions take place within our mind. All perceptions, 
be they the objects of the six consciousnesses or all the different 
thoughts and emotional reactions that might arise, -are not external 
to ourselves; they are mental occurrences that take place in our own 
mind. Therefore, all things are your own mind. Believing objects to be 
external is a mistaken concept. To believe that what is being 
experienced is other than our own perception, some object that exists 
by itself, apart from and separate from our experience of it, is a deluded 
idea. 
105 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
The great masters give all sorts of different teachings to help us un­
derstand how things actually are. They may ask us to use our own 
intelligence to figure out whether the normal way of experiencing is 
true or not. For example, look at a pillar in a room. The pillar appears 
to us through our seeing, our visual cognition, and in our minds the 
image of the pillar is perceived. Based on that we form the thought 
"There is a pillar in the room." The real proof of whether this is or isn't 
true is our own experience. The great Buddhist logicians Chandrakirti 
and Dignaga explained that we use our personal impressions as the 
final authentication of reality. They state that the sole evidence beings 
have that things are perceived as being outside is because we say "I see 
them; therefore they exist." There is no other way to validate a 
perception. That is called the proof of clearly knowing. Based on this 
reasoning, there is no reason to believe that things exist outside our 
own experience, or are separate from their being known. 
Mahamudra is the catalyst that changes our normal comprehension. 
The starting point in the tradition is proof through experience. The 
belief that things are outside of ourselves is nothing other than a 
mental perception. When examined, it becomes apparent that this mere 
presence has no reality to it. It is likewise with the perceiving mind, in 
that it does not possess any concrete existence. When mind is pointed 
out and recognized, it is possible to realize that both perceptions and 
the perceiver are nonexistent. 
We can discover this through intellectual reasoning or through 
direct experience. The end result is the same. The Buddha and many 
great masters used the analogy of a dream to facilitate the under­
standing of the essential unreality of all things. Whatever we perceive 
during the daytime, we also can experience at night in dreams. We can 
see and vividly experience mountains, houses, people and all sorts of 
different things. Do they really exist because we see them in our 
dreams? Are there actually mountains and houses while we dream? No, 
it only seems like there are. While they don't really exist, still, for the 
dreamer it feels as if they do. That is why it is said that all things are 
106 
SoNGS OF NAROPA 
like a dream -because, just as in a dream, all impressions of external 
objects in our waking experience appear only in the mind. Therefore, 
they're empty of concreteness. This point covered the nature of the 
Mahamudra of perception. 
Second, stating the nature of the Mahamudra of awareness: 
This mind, as well, is a mere movement of attention 
That has no self-nature, being merely like a gust of 
wind. 
Empty of identity, like space, 
All things, like space, are equal. 
The first verse was about what is perceived. The second verse is 
called stating the nature of the Mahamudra of awareness. In this 
context, you can simply call awareness the mind, the perceiver. When 
talking about ml.nd, we get the impression that there is a doer, the 
instigator or someone in charge. We feel that mind is very forceful, 
very powerful. We need to look at exacdy what this mind is. We must 
ask: "What is it that thinks; where are the thoughts?" At that moment 
it is very hard to pinpoint anything. However, simultaneously, there is a 
presence of thought that is similar to a reflection in a mirror. Look into 
a mirror very closely. find exacdy where the reflection is; where it comes 
from; where it goes to afterwards. If you tum the mirror around and 
the reflection disappears, you are at a complete loss to find a fixed place 
to assign the reflection to. It is the same with the images we experience 
in a dream. first we dream of one thing, then another. During the 
second dream, where exactly did those first images go? It is invariably 
impossible to find a place that they went to, because there is no such 
place. In the same way, what we call mind, the knower, is only a seem­
ing presence. There's no reality to it. It's a mere movement of attention: 
the attention moves as a thought, as a feeling, as a memory, but there is 
no substance to it. 
Let's investigate anger. When we are extremely angry, it feels like 
the anger has a power of its own. It overtakes us so that we lose control. 
107 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
We can't handle it; instead, it seems to handle us. It is so strong that 
we have to shout nasty words and contort our faces with rage. This is 
how it seems to be at that moment while our attention is directed 
outward towards the target of our anger. Instead of doing that, why not 
let our attention face itself, and turn inward. Look at what the anger is. 
Who feels angry? Where does this anger rise from? Is there a place 
where this anger is now? Is there someone who is angry, since we feel 
so strongly "I am angry"? Is there a real substance, a force? Qyestioning 
in this way, it's absolutely impossible to find such a thing. There is 
neither a place to find, nor a substance, nor any entity. It's simply a 
seeming presence, a mere movement of the attention which has no 
reality to it whatsoever. It is like a bubble on the surface of water. 
Anger arises from the empty essence; and thus it is nonexistent. We 
believe the anger is real. When we look into its essence we find that it 
is not. 
Sometimes our aversion towards a tbing or a person manifests as 
anger. Other times it's not as strong, but lingers as a more subtle form 
of aggression. We keep our hostility in mind and hold a grudge. We 
don't want to let go of the negativity. It is just ready to be provoked 
There's another shade of anger called ill-will, in which we wait for the 
opportunity to retaliate, to cause harm; we simply want that person to 
suffer. There is an additional type called spitefulness, when we wait for 
the opportunity to say nasty words that can hurt another's feelings. All 
these are different flavors of anger. In any of these situations, if we look 
into that emotion, or into the one who feels this emotion, we fail to 
find any concrete thing. 
Anger, resentment, ill-will, spitefulness -all are nothing more 
than a mere movement of the attention. They are a seeming presence 
that is not made out of anything. The moment we look into an 
emotion, we find no thing. The emotion has no self-nature. The ana­
logy given describes feelings as 'being merely like a gust of wind.' 
When you feel a gust of wind on your skin, is there anything to take 
hold of? No, because it is not substantial in the normal sense. You 
ro8 
SoNGS OF NAROPA 
don't have to think of the analogy as referring only to external wind. 
You can also think of it as the wind that moves within the channels of 
the body which causes our attention to flutter. Yet it is a mere move­
ment, a seeming presence of thought, of cognition, of disturbing emo­
tion. The moment we look into this movement, there is no thing. It is 
said it is empty of identity, possessing no core to it, like space. 
"All things", meaning all things perceived as being outside, "are 
equal;" they are "like space." Whatever is perceived has no real identity. 
There is no substance to it -it is empty, so in that sense perceived 
things are like space, or equal to it. Space is used as an example because 
space has no color or concrete substance. This verse also implies that 
both outer and inner things, meaning both perceived objects and the 
perceiving mind, are equal in that they have no identity to them. They 
are all equal, like, space, in being empty. 
If you have doubts about anything, here's your chance to ask. 
Student: During meditation practice I try to look directly at a disturbing 
emotion like anger. When I investigate the emotion, questioning, 
'What is it? Where is it? Where does it exist?" it seems like the harder 
I try, the more vivid it becomes, and it becomes more difficult to actu­
ally find the emotion itself. Somehow looking into the emptiness 
heightens the vividness of it. I was wondering if Rinpoche would 
discuss that. There's another aspect to that, too, which is that it's some­
what paralyzing, the simultaneity of it. It leaves me feeling dumb­
founded, completely perplexed. 
Rinpoche: There are two common mistakes in dealing with disturbing 
emotions in practice. One is to intellectualize the emotion. We think 
"It must be empty because this is what I've heard; therefore, this 
emotion is empty." We plaster over the naked emotion with the idea of 
emptiness. While the intellectual understanding is quite forceful in this 
case, it is not actual meditation experience. The actual practice is rather 
to face the disturbing emotion directly, without holding onto some idea 
about what a disturbing emotion is. Look in a naked way and ascertain 
what the real identity of the emotion is. Discover there is no 'thing' to 
109 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
it; that it's empty. In this way, the disturbing emotion has no foothold 
upon which it can remain. It dissolves. However, if we only have the 
idea of it being empty, the experience of its emptiness is pressed into 
the background. That's one way that we could be mistaken. 
The other is when we experience emptiness in actuality, but only for 
a fraction of a second. We look towards the emotion, and see that it's 
empty. Then we let it slide, thinking that it's sufficient. Actually, the 
direct experience of the emptiness of any emotion needs to be 
sustained, in order to totally uproot any basis for further continuation 
of the disturbing emotion. This is called 'straying into the remedy, or 
going astray as to what concerns the remedy. Whenever we feel a 
disturbing emotion we immediately use the idea of its emptiness as a 
hammer to knock the emotion on the head, so to speak. We then think 
that is sufficient. And we immediately become distracted again, until 
we remember to give the emotion another whack. That is not the 
correct way either. 
Student: Do all these things have to do with relaxing, in a way? 
Rinpoche: The remedy is not to figure out intellectually that the identity 
of an emotion is empty. It is to directly see this emptiness, and to 
sustain the continuity of this insight. By sustaining the continuity of 
the insight into emptiness, it becomes possible for all disturbing 
emotions to dissolve. That is the remedy. 
Sometimes when we are angry we do really try to look into the 
empty essence of this anger. We look and we look, but at the same time 
in the corner of our mind we feel: "I should retaliate because what he or 
she did was really not right. Something has to be done about that. It's 
my responsibility to make sure that justice gets served." As long as we 
retain fondness for resentment and manage to justify it, it is very hard 
to penetrate to the core of the emptiness of the emotion.+ 
IIO 
10 
IN THIS TEXT, The Summary ofMahamudra, Naropa explains the view 
under three headings: the Mahamudra of the perceived, the 
Mahamudra of awareness, and the Mahamudra of union. There are 
different traditions of teaching Mahamudra. Sometimes it is empha­
sized that one realizes the nature of the perceived, and after that the 
Mahamudra of awareness, which is mind. Another style maintains it 
doesn't matter much whether one understands that the objects per­
ceived are, in fact, mind. That conviction is not as important as under­
standing and realizing the nature of the Mahamudra of awareness. 
However, in this text, the great pandita Naropa teaches first the 
Mahamudra of the perceived, then the Mahamudra of awareness in a 
gradual way. 
The beginning verses on the Mahamudra of the perceived introduce 
us to the fact that what we perceive does not really exist, by nature. 
Moreover, it cannot be established as truly existing. It is emptiness. In 
the second verse we find that the perceiver, awareness, is likewise 
devoid of true existence by nature and is emptiness. In both of these 
cases, the empty quality rather than the cognizant quality is empha­
sized. 
The third point under the view of Mahamudra is called the nature 
of the Mahamudra of union. The nature of mind is not only empty, but 
III 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
cognizant as well. These two qualities of being empty and cognizant 
are an indivisible unity. first we are introduced to what we perceive and 
the perceiver as being empty and devoid of true existence. Under­
standing the emptiness of mind is not necessarily understanding the 
true nature of mind. Not only is the mind empty; it has the capacity to 
know, to cognize. 
Third, stating the nature of the Mahamudra of union: 
When speaking of 'Mahamudra,' 
It is not an identity that can be shown. 
Therefore the mind's suchness 
Is itself the state ofMahamudra. 
Now in this third verse about the Mahamudra of union, the first 
line states: "When speaking of Mahamudra." What is referred to as 
being Mahamudra? What do we take as the object of our meditation? 
What are we supposed to realize through our practice? Is Mahamudra a 
certain thing that can be pointed out and shown? No, Mahamudra is 
not an entity that we can hold in mind. It is not an object of our 
perception. It is not seen through the eyes, heard through the ears, 
smelled through our nose, tasted through the tongue, or felt through 
the body. 
Mahamudra is not a thing that can be shown, and yet it is the very 
nature or suchness of our mind. Mind is explained as the six groups of 
cognitions or as the eight groups of cognitions. These six were men­
tioned previously as the consciousnesses of sight, sound, smelling, 
tasting, f touch, and the mind consciousness. 'Mind' implies a sense of 
clarity, an ability to be conscious, to cognize. Looking into what that 
actually is, it is impossible to find a place where that clarity or conscious 
quality abides. Mind is not made out of anything. This actuality of how 
the mind really is is called the 'suchness', and that itself is the state of 
Mahamudra. 
What do we think of when we hear a statement like: "Emptiness 
not made out of anything whatsoever."? Since we are ordinary people 
II2 
SoNGS OF NAROPA 
we think of something that is utterly void, like space. Space is empty, 
totally empty. There is no concrete substance which we call space. 
However, this is not the same as the empty essence of Mahamudra. 
Empty space is empty of any capacities, any properties. There is 
nothing wrong with space, nothing negative about it. It is merely the 
dimension that is empty of matter. When the question is raised, "Is the 
Mahamudra nature of mind identical with space?", the answer is no, 
because space doesn't have any positive qualities. There is no basis for 
the capacity of wisdom, knowledge, great bliss and all the other 
enlightened attributes. Even though there are no negative charac­
teristics about space, there are no positive ones either. The total 
absence of good or evil characteristics is not the same as the Maha­
mudra nature of mind. The Mahamudra nature of mind, while being 
empty, does possess a nature of cognizance. 
Our traditional guidance manuals explain that when seeking to un­
derstand the essence of Mahamudra, we should begin by investigating 
the arising, dwelling and disappearance of the thinking mind, the flow 
of thought. We usually feel that there is some 'thing' which 
experiences. That feeling is precisely what we should look into when a 
thought moves. We should question in these ways: 'Where does a 
thought come from? What is the source of the thinker? From where 
does a cognition take place? Can we find a thought anywhere?" We 
should try not only to find the location of a thought, but also to deter­
mine how a thought is formed, and whether there is some substance to 
it. Looking into this very closely, we will sooner or later discover that 
there is neither a place of origin nor any thoughts to find anywhere, no 
matter how hard we search. Moreover, there is no 'thing' called mind 
which thinks or comes about from somewhere. After some investig­
ation, we discover that the nature of mind is nonarising, which means 
that there is no origination of mind. Next we look into where mind 
abides. finally we examine where mind, the thinking, goes when it 
disappears. When mind vanishes, what is it that vanishes, and into 
which place or location does this vanishing happen? We likewise fail to 
IIJ 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
find any 'thing' that dwells anywhere, or that disappears. All this is 
because mind is not made out of any concrete substance whatsoever. 
When we looked for this knowing entity called mind, and we failed 
to find any thing, is it because we somehow failed to look well enough? 
No, that's not so. Mind is not some thing that is out of reach. We are 
the ones who think and perceive, so our minds are something very close 
at hand which can be looked for. When we fail to find anything, the 
reason is none other than that there is no thing to find. Mind is not a 
concrete thing lying and waiting to be discovered. It is not that we 
needed to continue a little longer and eventually would have found it. 
Mind is unfindable. This is what the Third Karmapa stated in The 
Aspiration of Mahamudra: "It cannot be said to exist, since even the 
buddhas do not see it." What exactly does that mean? A buddha with 
perfect wisdom, should be capable of seeing the nature of mind, if such 
a thing existed. But if even a buddha cannot see a thing called mind, 
then definitely we as ordinary sentient beings will not be able to do so. 
Why is this? Again, it is because mind is not made out of anything 
whatsoever.2 
The Buddha described the nature of mind exactly when he said: 
"Transcendent knowledge, prajnaparamita, is beyond thought, word 
and description." We cannot adequately find words that describe 
exactly how the nature of mind is. It is not possible to use thoughts to 
figure out, reason, and come up with a mental picture of how the 
nature of mind is, because. this nature, this 'transcendent knowledge', 
lies beyond both words and thoughts. It is inconceivable, beyond the 
grasp of normal intellect. When we searched and didn't find the nature 
of mind, did that mean there was no thing at all? Is the nature of mind 
void like physical space? No, it's not like that either. The next line in 
the Karmapa Rangjung Dorje's composition is: ''You cannot say it is 
nonexistent, because it is the basis for both samsara and nirvana." Even 
though mind is not made out of anything, it's not totally non-existent. 
2• The entire song by Karmapa Rangjung Dorje is explained in The Song of 
Karmapa, (Rangjung Y eshe Publ.). 
114 
SONGS OF NAROPA 
It is the basis for both samsara and nirvana. Our ignorance of this 
empty cognizance is the basis for the whole of samsaric existence. 
Seeing this empty cognizance clearly, exactly as it is, becomes the basis 
for progressing through the paths and bhumis towards complete 
enlightenment. 
When an ordinary person hears about something that both exists 
and doesn't at the same time, it sounds like nonsense. If a thing exists, 
it is not non-existent. Conversely, if there isn't anything, you cannot 
say concurrently that it exists. For any other entity in this world, to be 
and not to be are a contradiction; it's either one or the other. However, 
the nature of mind doesn't really fall into either one of these two 
categories of existence or nonexistence. It is not our job to invent an 
adequate philosophical way of describing that which both exists and 
doesn't simultaneously. What we as practitioners need to do is simply 
experience how this nature of mind is -not merely figure it out 
intellectually. In the next line from the same verse, the Third Karmapa 
describes it thusly: "These two are not a contradiction, but the middle 
way of unity." There is no conflict between the essence of mind being 
empty and its nature being cognizant. While mind in essence is non­
existent or empty, its nature is cognizant, able to perceive. When we 
look into this nature of knowing, we see it is not made out of anything 
whatsoever. It is empty. Being empty and cognizant are not a contra­
diction; on the contrary, they are an indivisible unity. That itself is 
what is called 'the middle path'. It is an honest, straightforward path 
that does not become a sidetrack or an error: it is simply the middle 
way of unity. 
Ordinary people may think, "Oh, the nature of mind is beyond me; 
I don't have the ability to see it." We may think to truly realize the 
innate nature of suchness is quite difficult, and indeed, if we hold onto 
that attitude, it is hard! Fortunately, though, there were many great 
siddhas of the lineage who personally realized this nature. They very 
kindly gave pith instructions that we can receive and apply. When we 
persevere in these instructions and look into this mind, we discover 
IIS 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
that it's not very difficult to recognize the nature of mind. After all, our 
mind is just our mind. It's not far away or out of reach. It is simply our 
own nature of mind, that which perceives. When looking into that 
which experiences, into this mind, it's not that difficult at all to see it as 
it is. We can understand first-hand that it is not made out of anything, 
and yet it is not a complete nothing. There is still experience; there is 
the ability to perceive and be awake. These two are not two different 
entities -one empty, another cognizant. Mind is not limited to being 
one or the other. That is why the Third Karmapa in his fourth line 
says: "May we realize the unconfined nature of mind." 
It's possible in this context to doubt whether we can actually see the 
nature of mind. This problem arises particularly with people who have 
studied Buddhist philosophy. For instance, Shantideva, in the chapter 
on transcendent knowledge in the Bodhicharya Avatara,3 uses examples 
to show how it is not possible for the mind to know or see itself. One 
example he gives is that of a sword: it can cut other things, but no 
matter how sharp the sword is, it cannot cut itself. Likewise a very 
strong, agile person can master other creatures. He can tame a horse, or 
even an elephant- but he cannot ride on his own back, no matter how 
strong he is. In this same way, the mind cannot see itsel£ Chandrakirti 
gave similar examples for how the mind cannot see or apprehend itsel£ 
When reading these lines oflogic, we may doubt whether it's possible 
for the mind to see or realize itself. Honestly, though, this is not a 
problem. What Chandrakirti and Shantideva refute here is the possi­
bility of the mind seeing itself as a concrete thing. They do not speak 
about the mind looking into itself and not seeing any entity. That is 
not what they are refuting -no need to be in doubt about that. 
Both the Mahayana and Vajrayana traditions of Buddhism speak 
about the view and how to realize it. Even though the word view is 
used in both cases, the identity of that view is not exactly the same. 
The Sutra system's view is called 'the view of utilizing inference'. Here, 
3• See The Way of a Bodhisattva (Shambhala Publ.). 
u6 
SoNGS OF NAROPA 
we arrive at the view by deduction, through a process of investigating 
or inquiring further and further. In this process, one thinks, "It is 
probably true that the nature of mind is nothing whatsoever. It seems 
also to be true that it has a cognizant quality." This is all deduced 
through intellectual reasoning, and remains in the realm of thought. 
Yet it is possible through this intellectual understanding to feel con­
vinced, to gain a very clear, precise conviction of how things are. By 
growing accustomed to this understanding, sooner or later we are able 
to see in actuality the innate nature of things. Even though this is a 
quite long path, the innate nature of things is eventually seen directly. 
The view of Vajrayana, in the context of Mahamudra or Dzogchen, is 
called 'the view which utilizes direct perception'. That means that our 
mind is not something we have to think of or find at some other place 
far away. It is right here -after all, it's our own mind, isn't it? There is 
no need for a lot of deduction. All that is necessary is to take a look at 
"How is this mind? Where is it?" We simply look, and by looking, we 
see directly how it really is. That is why it is called the view of utilizing 
direct perception. 
Although in Mahamudra the view is introduced in direct expe­
rience, it is also possible for an individual to mistakenly approach it 
through inference or intellectual reasoning. One does this by not taking 
it personally, by not aiming for direct experience of Mahamudra. 
Instead, one thinks, "This is a profound idea I should grasp. Perceived 
objects do not really exist and my perceiving mind, my awareness, 
apparently doesn't really exist. These two are a unity. I must keep this 
understanding in mind." That is not what is really meant here in the 
context of Mahamudra. We should apply all these points to our own 
personal experience in a very clear and straightforward manner, rather 
than mistakenly intellectualizing our approach. 
Next, among the three points about the Mahamudra of 
meditation, first stating the nature of the Mahamudra of the basic 
state: 
II7 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
The first section was about the view. Now we come to the next 
section about the Mahamudra of meditation, which also has three 
points. The practitioner is introduced to 'This is how it is'; the nature 
of things, the nature of our minds. Remember, Mahamudra is not apart 
from ourselves -it is our own nature. Meditation here means the 
training in growing used to that and making it a continual experience. 
While the first three points about the view are not hard to comprehend, 
the next three points about the Mahamudra of meditation are not as 
easy. This is because it is rather difficult to become genuinely accus­
tomed to our nature. For countless lifetimes in samsaric existence we 
have been used to the exact opposite of realizing our nature. We have 
acted out of delusion and ignorance instead of from a state of knowing 
our minds. Instead of our attention facing towards its own nature; we 
have been extroverted, looking away from and being occupied with 
something other than our nature of mind. By repeating this pattern 
again and again, life after life, this ignorance has created an incredibly 
strong habitual tendency for not knowing the nature of our minds. 
Therefore, the training in the Mahamudra of meditation requires 
equally strong perseverance in the opposite direction. 
There is another common doubt people express concerning Maha­
mudra meditation: "If Mahamudra is merely a matter of relaxing my 
mind into an unfabricated state of naturalness, then why do Tibetan 
Buddhists do all those complicated rituals? Why do they beat big 
drums, blow different types of horns, chant countless texts, perform 
lengthy ceremonies and jump around in their bizarre dance costumes? 
What do these elaborate rituals have to do with natural mind?" It is 
certainly true that Mahamudra is simply a matter of leaving mind in its 
natural state. Honestly, though, sometimes it just doesn't happen. 
Sometimes our minds won't remain relaxed and natural, no matter how 
hard we try. On these occasions we need to apply various methods to 
relax the mind. The buddhas and great masters have very kindly and 
skillfully designed different means to focus our attention and guide us 
to the point where we can simply relax into the state of Mahamudra. 
II8 
SoNes oF NAROPA 
These methods take different forms: music, ritual dance, visualizing 
deities; reciting great numbers of mantras, prostrating many times, and 
so forth. All these diverse ways are skillful means leading to the state of 
natural mind. 
When we begin the practice of Mahamudra, although we may have 
an understanding of its nature, it is often not more than a short 
glimpse, a flash of insight that disappears and reappears. The conti­
nuity of the insight is not sustained at this point; there's no real stabi­
lity in it, no steadiness, and no deep clarity or brightness. The instruc­
tion in shamatha is extremely helpful in dealing with this. There are 
many different details on how to practice shamatha to attain stability of 
mind. Nowadays the most popular method is to focus the attention on 
the movement of breath. Following the breathing is extremely bene­
ficial. The Buddha himself said: "If discursive thoughts are predomi­
nant, place the attention on the inhalation and exhalation of your 
breath." When we shift our attention over to simply noticing the 
movement of breath, our thought involvement automatically subsides, 
and that is definitely very useful. 
In the Mahamudra tradition the type of shamatha being cultivated 
is somewhat more subtle. The attention is not fixed on any specific 
focus like the breath. We simply pay attention to the empty and awake 
quality of mind and sustain that. We avoid involvement in thoughts 
about past, present, or future events. For example, we might spend a lot 
of time recalling: "Last year I went to such-and-such a place; I met so­
and-so and did this and that. It was nice (or, it was not nice)," and so 
on. As soon as we notice that we are mentally 'following the past', we 
just take a break from that activity and let it go. Likewise with future 
thoughts: "Next year I'll go to that country. I'll meet so-and-so and I'll 
work on this project." That is called 'anticipating the future'. When you 
notice that you're doing that, just let it go; take a break from that. It's 
the same with thoughts, feelings or impressions we have about the 
present moment. Don't sit and make value judgments about them. 
When you notice you've gotten carried away; take a break from it. It's 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
much easier to see the nature of mind and stay with the empty, awake 
quality when we are disengaged from our constant preoccupation with 
thoughts of past, present and future. 
Sometimes we get entangled in a thought pattern. There's a method 
called 'abrupt cutting' which is useful with very strong, forceful 
thoughts or opinions that we nurture. Abruptly cutting means we 
simply sever the involvement in that thought. You could say that it is a 
wrathful approach. A more peaceful way is known as 'letting go into 
whatever arises without fabrication.' This is easier to do with ordinary 
and relatively weak thoughts. Simply let the thought slide; let it subside 
all by itself without accepting or rejecting it. When this type of thought 
occurs just let it vanish, without trying to do anything in particular. If 
our mind is overtaken by forceful thoughts, we can cut that 
involvement abruptly. Using these two methods, we can deal with any 
type of thought.+ 
120 
1 1 
EARLIER I SPOKE ON THE VIEW OF MAHAMUDRA and on its impor­
tance in creating a firm foundation for the meditation practice of 
Mahamudra. I also discussed the importance of shamatha, of stillness 
of mind or calm attention. I would like to stress that increasing one's 
presence of mind and cultivating the stability of shamatha should not 
be confined to the meditation session. We should try to be more 
mindful in all situations and at all times in our lives. 
There is a famous saying that 'the spontaneous arising of the 
meditation state is due to the power of blessings'. 'Blessings' refers to a 
power or capacity that we can receive. Due to blessings, someone who 
has not experienced the meditation state will be able to experience it; 
someone not stable in the meditation state will become more stable; 
and someone whose meditation state is not that clear will gain clarity 
and alertness. In both Mahamudra and Dzogchen, the way to receive 
blessings from the lineage masters is through the preliminary practices 
of the four types, especially through the guru yoga practice. Do not 
apply the guru yoga only once in a while; but in all circumstances, 
remember to supplicate from the core of your heart your guru and 
lineage masters. In this way we receive blessings, which are extremely 
important. 
121 
KHENCHEN THRANGu RrNPOCHE 
In the V ajrayana tradition, it is often said one should regard the 
guru as equal to a buddha, or even as superior to a buddha. For non­
Vajrayana practitioners, this might seem inappropriate. According to 
the general teachings of Buddhism only the fully awakened one, the 
Buddha, can be the object of supplication, veneration and devotion. To 
put someone else in his place as that supreme object might not feel 
right. Within Vajrayana, the Buddha is still the supreme object of our 
supplications and devotion. However the Buddha appeared in this 
world quite a long time ago. Even though we have connected with 
Buddhist practices and become Buddhists, there are centuries and cen­
turies between ourselves and the Buddha. Because we didn't have the 
fortune to meet the Buddha in person and hear his teachings, we need 
someone or something to serve as a link between the Buddha and 
ourselves. This is exactly what our root guru does. 
The qualities and activities of our personal teachers are of course not 
the same as those of the Buddha, in that they don't have the same 
power and depth. Yet for us as individuals, the blessings of the 
Buddha's qualities and activities reach us mainly through other people. 
Blessings are received in the most immediate way through a lineage of 
teachers. Our lineage gurus are thus extremely important, as they are a 
conduit. We receive blessings by connecting directly with masters, 
especially our root guru. For us as individuals, being with our guru is 
like being with the Buddha in person. Our root guru is therefore 
considered even more important than the Buddha, in the sense that he 
connects us directly with the teachings and the blessings. We should 
supplicate our root and lineage masters as often as possible in order to 
receive the blessings of the Buddha and the Dharma. For example, we 
can chant Calling the Guru from Afar from the core of our hearts, and 
make sincere, deep-felt supplications through guru yoga.4 After suppli­
cating, receive the empowerments by imagining that the rays of light 
4• Calling the Guru from Afar by Jamgon Kongtriil can be found in journey 
Without Goal, (Shambhala Publ.), or as a separate chant booklet with extra 
verses for lineage masters, (Rangjung Yeshe Publ.). 
122 
SoNGS oF NAROPA 
from the gurus forehead, throat, and heart center dissolve into you, 
blessing your body, speech and mind. 
What we need to realize is the nature of mind, the basic, natural 
state here called Mahamudra. This nature of mind has always been 
with us, throughout all our countless former lives in samsara. It is not 
like we somehow lost the nature of mind and now have to regain it -
we simply have to recognize something that has always been with us. 
But if it's been continuously with us all this time, why haven't we 
realized it already? What is missing? The answer is that we lack the 
blessings. To recognize the nature of mind, we need to be infused with 
the power of blessings of the truth, the Dharma, passed from an 
enlightened one, a buddha, down through the realized lineage masters. 
The realization of this truth is what makes the difference. By receiving 
the blessings, we don't suddenly somehow get a new nature of mind 
that we didn't have before. Neither is it true that the longer we stay in 
samsara the more lost our nature becomes. No, it's totally unchanged, 
right with us all the time. Nevertheless, the ability to realize what is 
intrinsically present in ourselves depends upon the right circumstances 
-on whether or not we receive the blessings and are infused with this 
capacity to realize. The way to receive the blessings depends upon the 
sincerity of our openness, devotion, and trust. In order to open up our 
hearts and minds to trust, to devotion, to faith, it is important to make 
sincere supplications. 
When I use the word faith, I don't mean unreasonable blind faith, 
but an open-mindedness that arises after we receive the blessings and 
understand they are a definite reality. It is not that we close our eyes 
and insist that it must be so because of what we have heard (and 
probably haven't understood). Buddhism advocates 'faith through 
knowing the reasons' -an appreciation that comes from comprehend­
ing the qualities of enlightenment that are deeper than our limited 
scope of experience. This allows us to open up and receive the bless­
ings. These days, in my opinion, it seems that the scientific frame of 
mind which dominates Western culture creates somewhat of a barrier 
123 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
to faith and devotion. The rational scientific approach to things is 
based on the unspoken premise that things must be tangibly perceived 
and measured before they can be proven to exist. Clinging to such a 
premise merely traps one within it. Try instead the premise, "Maybe it 
is possible to have a wider horizon than an ordinary human being." 
This opens one up to the possibility of receiving the blessings of en­
lightened beings. 
It is neither something to be corrected nor transformed, 
But when anyone sees and realizes its nature 
All that appears and exists is Mahamudra, 
The great and all-encompassing dharmakaya. 
Among the three points about the Mahamudra of meditation, the 
first one states the nature of Mahamudra or the basic state. The 
beginning sentence -"It is neither something to be corrected nor 
transformed" -is extremely profound. What we are trying to realize is 
the basic state, the nature of our minds. Whatever the 'it' refers to -be 
it what is perceived in our experience; the perceiver; our mind; or the 
Mahamudra of union -we do not need to make up anything artificial 
about the nature of our minds or fabricate something that wasn't there 
before. We do not need to correct some flaw in the nature of mind and 
transform it into something good. We should not think that by train­
ing in Mahamudra there is a transformation taking place, that our 
nature is through the training somehow becoming something other 
than it already is. Our basic state is and always was the unity of 
emptiness and cognizance. Mahamudra training is simply a matter of 
recognizing how it is. By growing accustomed to this through training, 
it becomes an actuality. That is what is meant by realization. Thus, the 
Mahamudra of meditation does not involve correcting, contriving, or 
transforming anything. The next sentence is: "But when anyone sees 
and realizes its nature." 'Anyone' does not refer to a special person of a 
aristocratic family, or someone with a unique talent, but to any person. 
It doesn't matter whether the practitioner is young or old, important or 
124 
SoNGS oF NAROPA 
unimportant, learned or uneducated -none of those things are 
important in this context. When it's a matter of simply realizing the 
nature of mind, those specifics don't matter at all. That is why N aropa 
uses the word 'anyone'. What is necessary is to first recognize, then see 
and realize the nature of mind. 
The Tibetan word used here for 'nature' literally means 'simply that'. 
The 'that' refers to the fact that the ultimate true nature is not apart 
from being the nature of the relative state of mind -it is simply its 
nature. That's why it's called 'simply that'. Since everyone has this 
nature, what is important is to be sincerely interested and to trust that 
it is possible to recognize it by looking. After looking, we need to see it; 
and after seeing it, we need to fully realize exacdy how it is. Do not feel 
satisfied with intellectually having figured it out; or with inferring that 
it's probably like such-and-such. That is called 'clouding the nature of 
mind with inference,' or 'obscuring yourself with intellectual thoughts.' 
Instead, nakedly and directly see this nature as it is and realize it. 
One danger in practicing Mahamudra is that we may confuse 
inferred knowledge with direct experience and fail to see the difference 
between what we figure out and what we see direcdy. These two can be 
mistaken. Naropa uses the word 'see,' rather than 'know' or 'under­
stand,' to make sure that we don't make that mistake. In this context, 
the nature of mind is not an object of knowledge. It is not an entity 
that we inquire about, investigate and finally get an idea about and feel 
gratified. That would be what is called 'having a deduced or inferred 
idea of an entity held in mind'. To make sure that we get the point, 
Naropa uses the word 'to see,' which means like seeing something with 
the naked eye. When you see something, you don't have to have any 
idea about what it is in order to see it -you simply see it, directly and 
nakedly. What is necessary here is to let our mind simply look into 
itself and directly see how it is. Our mind is empty of any identity, and 
is cognizant by nature. These two qualities are indivisible. Knowing 
this is direct knowledge, attained by seeing in actuality. Milarepa, when 
giving the pointing-out instruction to Gampopa, said, "The view is 
125 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
what it's about, so look directly into your own mind. It's like the master 
wrestler looking for his jewel, Gampopa." The analogy Milarepa used 
comes from an old myth about a master wrestler who had a jewel in his 
forehead. He often worried about whether he would lose it while 
wrestling. One day when he was really tired, his forehead wrinkled 
down over the jewel and covered it. When as was his habit he touched 
his forehead to see whether the jewel was still there, he didn't feel it. 
He got incredibly worried and went everywhere looking for it. He 
searched and groped around, but he couldn't find it. At some point he 
finally discovered that actually his jewel had been there all the time. 
The basic message Milarepa was giving Gampopa was: look into your 
own mind. Trying to figure out this nature by means of intellectual rea­
soning is not going to help. What is necessary is simply to relax and see 
it directly. 
When training in this seeing, everything -all that appears and 
exists -is experienced as Mahamudra. Both that which is perceived 
and the perceiving mind have the identical nature of being the basic 
state of Mahamudra. If we grow accustomed to this through training 
and attain complete realization, everything is the great and all­
encompassing Dharmakaya. The innate nature is seen as encompassing 
everything. 
I would like to introduce one important key phrase for practice: 'rest 
freely in uncontrived naturalness'. Uncontrived naturalness doesn't 
mean deliberately trying to be natural or free. We should not endeavor 
to rid ourselves of whatever could be considered unpleasant in our 
meditation state. Conversely, we should not attempt to deliberately 
bring forth a state that is supposedly good. That's why the word 
'uncontrived' is used. Resting freely is the exact opposite of being tight 
and constricted. Some people, who have a great interest in their 
meditation practice, sit down in an extremely intent frame of mind. 
They tighten their body into a stiff posture; while their mind is very 
resolute that it will be 100% concentrated. This tense state results in 
the muscles, tendons and spine being held very tightly. Sit like that for 
126 
SoNGS oF NAROPA 
a while and it becomes incredibly uncomfortable -so much so that one 
is unable to continue. 
Actually, the best meditation is done in a totally relaxed state, when 
one is not constricting oneself or tightening up inwardly. Don't sit 
tensing your muscles and tendons; instead, freely and loosely remain at 
ease. 
If we sit with a very tight posture, we may at times feel a tightness 
around the heart. Due to our overexertion we create undue pressure in­
side ourselves. Sometimes our brain might even feel squeezed from the 
sides, very tight and uncomfortable. There's no need to create that kind 
of situation. Rather, relax by letting be, and have a sense of setting 
yourself free. Letting be can be misunderstood as meaning to simply 
allow yourself to get carried away. We may imagine that the mind is 
permitted to take off and get involved in whatever emotion or thought 
that arises. That's a little too relaxed! You should be not too tight and 
not too relaxed, but hold both the body and the mind in a very free and 
easy way. This is important. 
Another piece of advice given by many of the great meditators of 
the past is: put mindfulness on guard! In other words, place a 
watchman called 'presence of mind' on sentry duty. Be present and 
aware of what is taking place in the mind. Such attentiveness helps us 
to become aware of whether we are distracted or undistracted. Of 
course we know the difference between the mind resting naturally in 
itself or being carried away by memories or plans. But it is momentarily 
possible, and quite common, not to be fully present and to simply get 
lost in thought, oblivious to the fact that we are distracted. While mind 
has a singular nature -it does not have many parts -cognition can 
have different expressions or mental events. Some may be unvirtuous; 
some virtuous, and so forth. Among the various expressions of mind, 
one of the most important is a sense of presence, of being attentive- in 
other words, mindfulness. Mindfulness is simply mind being aware of 
what is happening. 
127 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
Student: You spoke of cutting forceful thoughts wrathfully. How do we 
deal with forceful thoughts without being an accomplished meditator? 
Rinpoche: What I mentioned about 'abrupt cutting' was in the context 
of shamatha, and referred to dealing with forceful thoughts, not weak 
ones. Please understand that any forceful thought gains its strength, the 
power that fuels it, only from oneself. This strength could be a strong 
fascination, as in, "I like to think about such-and-such!", or "I definitely 
must do such-and-such." There's a delicious taste we get from being 
involved in our thoughts. It is that clinging, that savoring of it, that 
reinforces the thought or the emotion. It's not that the thought by itself 
has some independent power. It's because we feel "All right, maybe I 
should be meditating, but this is such an interesting thought that I 
must spend a little more time on getting into its complete details." 
Remember that it is our fascination that makes the thought 
involvement stronger. 
'Cutting abruptly' means you return to your senses, remind yourself 
that what you set out to do is not to sit and daydream about this and 
that, and then get down to the meditation training. Remind yourself, 
"I'm wasting my time. I'm not going to continue along that track; I'm 
going to return back to the main point." That action, that decision, is 
what cuts the forceful thought. To use an amusing analogy, it's like 
clubbing a pig on the snout. Imagine a big, hungry pig who sees food. 
To stop him, you have to whack him over the snout, because that's the 
only place he can really feel it. To whack the pig anywhere else will not 
faze him if he's really intent on eating. 
Student: Didn't you say that the nature of the mind was beyond the 
four extremes of existing, not existing, both and neither? Is under­
standing that what 'seeing' means? 
Rinpoche: Understanding the nature of mind to be beyond the four ex­
tremes of existing, non-existing, both and neither is different from 
seeing the nature of mind in actuality. The first statement is a tool used 
to convince us intellectually about how the mind isn't. Through this we 
get a certain intellectual conviction about mind, which is different than 
128 
SoNGS oF NAROPA 
seeing direcdy. The aim of inference is to be able to see directly 
afterwards. However, the focus, what is being inferred, is not the same 
as what is seen instantaneously through direct perception. There's 
definitely a difference. 
Student: Is clubbing the pig on the snout the same as suppressing 
thoughts? 
Rinpoche: The word 'suppressing', in Tibetan actually means reducing. 
The general method of reducing negative thoughts and emotions is to 
apply an antidote against them. For example, the remedy against anger 
is loving kindness and compassion. Even though this year we may not 
have been successful in avoiding being irritated, angry and resentful, we 
can try during the coming year to be more compassionate and kind. 
Then maybe it will be easier to deal with anger. If we look back, we 
might say that our anger has been 'suppressed.' It's not that it has been 
entirely squeezed out, but there is less of it -it has been reduced. That 
kind of reducing is not the same as clubbing the pig on the snout, 
which is a more immediate method. The force of your involvement in 
thought is your own clinging to it. When you remind yourself that 
actually this is a waste of time -when you tell yourself, "I'm supposed 
to be practicing meditation, I'll give it up" -that's called 'hitting the 
pig on the snout'. It is not that you just sit and think, "I shouldn't be 
thinking this." That doesn't help at all.+ 
12 
0 F THE THREE POINTS ON MAHAMUDRA MEDITATION, I have cov­
ered the first one, which is "Stating the nature of Mahamudra of 
the basic state." Now I will discuss the second: "Stating the nature of 
the Mahamudra of how to realize," The way of realizing means, first, 
what needs to be realized, and second, the method of how to realize 
that. Earlier I mentioned the method as being uncontrived naturalness, 
or resting freely without fabrication, and I will now explain this further. 
Second, stating the nature of the Mahamudra of realization: 
Naturally and without contriving, allowed to simply be, 
This unimagined dharmakaya, 
Letting it be without seeking, that is the meditation 
training. 
But to meditate while seeking is deluded mind. 
It is possible to explain this in a very short and somewhat 
unpolished way. We can also get into all sorts of fine details about how 
to practice and train in Mahamudra. One of these ways is called 
'looking while being still'. 'Still' in this context refers to shamatha, 
which we have cultivated to some extent. We feel that our mind is 
quiet, our attention remains calm, and we are concentrated. There is a 
sense of being fully relaxed and at peace. During this time when our 
IJO 
SoNGS oF NAROPA 
attention remains at peace, look into what exactly it is that remains at 
peace. Qyestion yourself, 'Where does it remain? How does it remain? 
What is the 'it' that remains? What is its identity?" By simply looking 
into this, we fail to find any concrete entity that is at peace, that 
remains calmly. This stillness of mind that has no real concrete identity 
to be found is how it really is -this is the basic state. Yet, at the same 
time, it feels as if there is a mind which is calm and resting in stillness. 
This feeling is only superficial, because the moment we investigate the 
question: "Does this mind have a dwelling place? Is there something 
that abides calmly?", we find nothing. At the same time there is a 
feeling of stillness! The seeming and the real, the relative and the 
ultimate, are thus indivisible. While remaining calm in shamatha, we 
can see the mind as it actually is by looking into its nature. 
Unfortunately our mind is not always still. Sometimes it moves into a 
thought or an emotion, and there is also a method to look into its 
identity at those times. 
When we leave our peaceful state of shamatha meditation and begin 
to think; this thinking seems more tangible than the stillness. Strong 
thoughts, such as emotions, give us the very distinct impression that: "I 
am thinking, I am feeling such-and-such about that." Anger, attach­
ment, jealousy, stupidity, and pride are all particularly strong attach­
ments, which create a very clear understanding that "I am feeling." 
Even during the more subtle formation of concepts or neutral ideas, it 
still seems like something is arising or being formed in our mind. We 
must look into this thinking or feeling to discover whether or not there 
actually is some 'thing', some entity there which thinks or feels. There 
are two ways that we could do this. One is to label thoughts when they 
arise or move: 'Well, now there's a thought; there's another thought." 
With this method, we are one step behind in pursuit of the thought, 
always attaching a label to it. This is not a technique ofMahamudra. In 
Mahamudra, the practitioner looks directly into that which thinks. He 
or she doesn't label it as being such-and-such. Through this type of 
practice we discover that thoughts and emotions have no concrete 
IJI 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
identity, in exacdy the same way as we discovered that stillness had no 
identity. 
The great siddhas of the past used a very nice analogy for thought 
movement, comparing it to the movement of wind through empty 
space. Like the wind, it seems like there is something, but there is 
nothing to see when we look. The wind has no visible color or form, 
does it? It is the same with thoughts and feelings. If we are unaware of 
our fixated attention and do not look into the thinker, we will not 
recognize that there is no entity there. We continue along with our 
fixation unaware and unknowing. On the other hand, the moment we 
look towards the thinker, into the identity of what thinks, we are at a 
complete loss to see anything. This is not because we somehow missed 
the point: it is simply because there is no 'thing' to see. 
Whether we look into the essence of the knower while being still or 
while thinking, in both cases there is no concrete 'thing' that is still or 
that thinks. This is simply our basic state; how it is all by itsel£ This is 
the unimaginable Dharmakaya, which is only a matter of simply 
looking and seeing it as it is. There is no need to form a description of 
how it is or to conceptualize it. This is what was mentioned before as 
'being beyond thought, word and description'. The word 'unimagin­
able' means 'impossible to think of as an object of thought'. The nature 
of mind is empty in essence and cognizant by nature; these two are 
indivisible. This Dharmakaya is the real condition, the basic state. 
"Letting it be without seeking," without thinking. This is not some­
thing that we will discover at a later point in time; nor is it something 
that we need to seek in a far-away place. "Letting it be without seeking, 
that itself is the meditation training." 
Remember the line in one of the chants we do, the Do'lje Chang 
Chenma, which says: ''The essence of thought is dharmakaya, it is 
taught."? If we try to understand that statement in terms of intellectual 
reasoning, it seems impossible. It doesn't make sense. After all, isn't it 
thinking itself which obscures dharmakaya? From our personal point of 
view, it seems like when there is thinking there is no dharmakaya, and 
IJZ 
SoNGS OF NAROPA 
when there's dharmakaya there is no thinking. As a matter of fact, the 
basic nature within the thinking -meaning the very identity of what 
thinks -is itself dharmakaya. From this perspective, there is no 
conflict whatsoever. It's true that being involved in a thought is not 
dharmakaya, but remember: the very essence of that which thinks is 
dharmakaya. Don't keep the attitude that thought is impure and has to 
be cast away, while dharmakaya is pure and should be held on to. Such 
intellectualization only makes it more difficult to realize this nature, 
how it really is. 
As I mentioned several times before, while training in knowing this, 
we can fall prey to intellectualizing. Instead of seeing what basically is, 
we set up our own version by making concepts about it, thinking, "This 
is emptiness! This is the clarity, the cognizant quality." Rather than ac­
knowledging that our basic state is simultaneously empty and 
cognizant, we create our own conceptual model of an empty and a 
cognizant quality, and try to fuse them together. That effort is nothing 
more than a creation of more thoughts -'thought building,' we could 
say. Such involvement, however subtle or intelligent it might be, blocks 
off the direct seeing of the natural state. Hence the last line, "But to 
meditate while seeking is deluded mind" 
Third, stating the nature of the Mahamudra of indivisibility: 
Just as with space and a magical display, 
While neither cultivating nor not cultivating 
How can you be separate or not separate! 
This is a yogi's understanding. 
Now for the third among the three points of the Mahamudra of 
meditation, ''Third, stating the nature of the Mahamudra of indivisibil­
ity." The indivisibility of the perceiver and the perceived means that 
their essence is not two different things. It simply manifests different 
aspects of the same identity, which form an integral unity. Mipham 
Rinpoche, in his commentary on the chapter of transcendent 
knowledge in the Bodhicharya Avatara, mentions that some people 
133 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
misunderstand the nature of the perceived, meaning of phenomena, 
and of mind. They think that what we experience is real and concrete, 
while emptiness is totally non-existent, like the horns of a rabbit. 
When one has such concepts in mind, the unity of appearance and 
emptiness is like tying together a white and a black string and calling 
that 'the unity of appearance and emptiness'. If one insists on 
misunderstanding the nature of things this way, one will also mis­
construe the unity of what is perceived and its emptiness. We should 
instead understand the perceived to be more like a magical illusion, 
while emptiness is like the space within which this magical illusion 
occurs. 
It is also necessary to realize that appearance and emptiness do not 
cancel each other out. It is not that emptiness is lost once there is 
appearance. At the very instant of appearing, the identity of this 
appearance is empty -intangible like a dream. It is not necessary to 
negate the presence of what was dreamt for a dream to be empty. For 
example, when you dream of a mountain with all its distinct features, it 
is vividly present,. crisp and clear. At the same time there is no real 
mountain whatsoever- it's empty. This emptiness of the mountain 
does not get lost in any way because of its apparent presence in the 
dream. The lucid experience of a dreamed mountain occurs even 
though it has no true existence. Similarly, we perceive at the same time 
that the object of our perception has no concrete identity. In other 
words, its emptiness coexists with its being present. 
That is why Naropa says: ''Just as with space and a magical display." 
'Space' here represents the empty quality, while the magical display is 
what we perceive while experiencing. The magical display is not other 
than space itself. When a magical display is visible, it is not that it had 
to move out of space to another location in order to manifest. It occurs 
in space -in a way we could say it is space that is somehow made 
visible. The magic is indivisible from the space itself. 
In the next sentence, 'While neither cultivating nor not cultivating," 
the word 'cultivating' and meditating is the same in the Tibetan. We 
134 
SoNGs oF NAROPA 
don't have to make an artificial creation through an act of meditation. 
We should not construct a fake state and call it Mahamudra. On the 
other hand, looking into the essence is not without cultivating, in some 
sense. It is not that we totally let go and carry on forming ordinary 
deluded concepts as usual. 
The result of that kind of training is described in the line "How can 
you be separate or not separate!" It is not the case that we are divorcing 
or separating ourselves from the thinking which is some entity that we 
have to throw away. At the same time, being not separate means 
acknowledging that the very basic state, the identity of that which 
thinks, is no 'thing' whatsoever that needs to be gotten rid o£ In this 
way, we are neither separate nor not separate. We can say that 
cultivating and not cultivating is like the path, while being neither 
separate nor not separate is the fruition. 
"This is the yogi's understanding" means that this is what can be ac­
complished. When we become truly trained in this way, we will realize 
the basic state. While trying to train, of course, we inevitably encounter 
some difficulties. One possibility is that we become dull and absent­
minded. Maybe we feel a little bit shut down, tired and drowsy. 
Another difficulty is to be carried away by thought and become 
agitated. On these occasions thoughts seem to be a little too vigorous, 
too active. It becomes impossible to abandon thinking about this and 
that. While these obstacles do not exist in the nature of mind, 
unfortunately they can arise on the path. The different manuals on how 
to train in Mahamudra offer techniques on ways to handle these two 
situations. 
Let's examine the two problems of dullness and agitation a little fur­
ther. There are different reasons why we become agitated when trying 
to practice. first is attachment, or desire. Thinking of some situation we 
were in where we enjoyed ourselves, we want to get back and re-experi­
ence the happiness we felt. We feel attached to that experience and we 
start making plans about how we can recreate it and feel that same joy 
we had. Another way we can make ourselves agitated is through anger 
135 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
or aversion. We focus on our enemy or someone we hold a grudge 
against, thinking, "He did such a terrible thing to me! It was wrong; 
and now I should do something to hurt him back." This kind of feeling 
belongs to anger and ill-will. Making plans about what to do about 
someone we don't like definitely disturbs our meditation state. Then 
there's regret, where we feel guilty about an action we did in the past. 
While practicing, we think: "I really shouldn't have done that. It was 
inappropriate. I'm a bad person." We make ourselves feel guilty and 
cultivate that feeling. A fourth way to produce agitation is 
indecisiveness, doubt, feeling unsure about what to do: "Should I do 
such-and-such, maybe it's a good idea-wait a minute, no, maybe I 
shouldn't do it." We waver back and forth, creating thought after 
thought. These are four basic ways of being agitated. 
There are many different remedies for agitation, including changing 
our attitude, shifting our physical position, or adjusting our visual 
focus. When trying to change your attitude, remind yourself that 
nothing lasts. This situation, like everything else, changes. It's guaran­
teed to be fleeting. Happy moments never last, and neither do unhappy 
feelings of hurt or sadness. There's no point in all this involvement. It's 
futile. Since everything is impermanent, why bother? That kind of 
reminder is very helpful in this situation. 
We can remedy agitation by shifting our physical situation. The 
ways to do that may sound a little strange, but they may prove 
beneficial. One method is to draw the window curtains to make the 
room a little more dim, which might help calm your mind. Another 
solution is to put on more clothing and make yourself warmer. Or, if 
you are sitting too straight, relax slightly so that your body loosens up a 
little. These three methods can help reduce agitation. 
The other major disturbance to the meditation state is dullness or 
drowsiness, both of which cause us to feel unclear. first we feel a little 
drowsy, then dull, and eventually we fall asleep. Since that definitely 
obscures the meditation state, we need to apply a remedy. One is to 
inspire our attitude by thinking of the qualities of the awakened state of 
SoNGS oF NAROPA 
the Buddha, of the Dharma, of the practice of samadhi. Think of the 
great benefit and the immense fortune to have the opportunity right 
now to progress on the path to enlightenment. If we inspire ourselves 
and deeply appreciate this great fortune, we'll wake up and won't feel as 
drowsy. Second, we can change our physical situation by taking off 
some layers of clothing so that we're less warm. We might also open up 
the curtains and the windows, making the room brighter and airier. 
Straighten your physical posture, consciously concentrating and 
tightening up your body. All those things help us to wake up and not 
feel obscured or dull. 
The third way of remedying both agitation and dullness is to adjust 
our visual focus and to imagine something. In the case of agitation, 
imagine a tiny black four-petaled flower facing downwards at your 
heart center. Visualize it as being, the size of a pea, with a little sphere, 
also black, in the center. It sinks down and remains beneath our body, 
on the seat. Keeping the attention on that helps to reduce the feeling of 
agitation. To remedy dullness, imagine a white flower facing upwards. 
It also has a little sphere the size of a pea in the center, which ascends 
and hovers at the top of our head, bright and clear. This helps to 
remedy the feeling of being drowsy or dull.+ 
137 
13 
UP UNTIL NOW I HAVE COVERED the Mahamudra of the view and 
the Mahamudra of meditation. Now we have arrived at the third 
point, which is the Mahamudra of conduct. The first part of this is 
combined with the view, in other words, conduct combined with the 
VIeW. 
Once more, for the three points about the Mahamudra of 
conduct,first, stating the nature of the Mahamudra ofself-liheration: 
All the good deeds and harmful actions 
Dissolve by simply knowing this nature. 
The emotions are the great wisdom; 
Like a jungle fire, they are the yogi's helpers. 
These words are particularly suited to those who have understood 
the basic view and have realized it in actuality -those who have 
reached a high level of experience. Since we are beginners, it is not 
quite appropriate for us to follow these instructions to the letter. In the 
case of ordinary sentient beings, there is always something that we need 
to avoid or to abandon. 
We may have tremendous interest in spiritual practice, in the 
Dharma. We may have pursued that interest and succeeded in meeting 
a qualified master, to the point where we have received profound 
SoNGS oF NAROPA 
instructions. We may even have put them into practice, and to some 
extent have had personal experience of the state of samadhi. All that is 
of course very well, it's excellent. But maybe we are not really pro­
gressing in meditation training. We may feel, "I've practiced medita­
tion all these years but I haven't gotten any genuine results; I haven't 
reached fruition yet. Why is this?" It is because of not having 'made use 
of the conduct' in the sense of using every moment in our lives as part 
of the training. The conduct hasn't taken effect. Remember the quote 
from Gampopa which says, "Although your view is as high as the sky, 
be scrupulously careful in your actions and behavior." Regardless of 
whether or not we have realized a very high view and experienced the 
natural state; be very careful in what to accept and reject. 
As sentient beings we create karma through our physical actions. It's 
crucial that we do our best to avoid creating any negative karma and 
that we act to create positive karma instead. Since we create karma 
through the words we say, we should make up our minds to avoid 
saying words that harm others and to use our voice to create positive 
karma. It's the same with our thoughts, which likewise create both 
positive and negative karma. It is extremely important to form the 
attitude to avoid indulging in harmful thoughts as much as possible. 
Try to cultivate the perspective of wanting to improve both self and 
others. Please be conscientious and careful in all actions. This is 
incredibly important. 
As ordinary people, we of course make mistakes, but that's not what 
matters here. What matters is that we make up our minds to sincerely 
attempt not to indulge in negative actions any longer. Sometimes we 
succeed in this, while other times we'll fail. Still, we should engender 
the attitude that "I will try my best to avoid the ten unvirtuous actions 
as much as I'm able, and to do what is helpful and beneficial for myself 
and others." Most of you probably know the ten unvirtuous actions -
the three of body, the four of speech, and the three of mind. We should 
form the resolve that "In the past I wasn't that careful in avoiding what 
is negative to others; but from now on I will be." Forming a 
139 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
determination to refrain from harm in the future and a sense of remorse 
for the harm we've done in the past is important. We shouldn't think, 
"Well, there's nothing I can do about it. It's my nature." Then it will be 
very hard to progress, to create what is positive and avoid what is nega­
tive. Instead, develop the frame of mind that "I will strive to avoid evil 
and do what is good." This is essential. 
You might notice that becoming intoxicated or drugged is not men­
tioned among the ten unvirtuous actions. Since it is not openly referred 
to, it may not seem to be particularly harmful. Still, it does cause the 
practitioner to be less careful, attentive and discriminating. For those 
reasons it is not a particularly good idea. We should put emphasis on 
being conscientious and developing presence of mind. Always be mind­
ful in any situation and cultivate the state of meditation as much as 
possible. 
Concerning good deeds, the Buddha taught extensively on the six 
transcendent actions, the six paramitas. The first one is transcendent 
giving, or generosity, which can explained as three kinds: the giving of 
material things, the giving of protection against fear, and the giving of 
the truth, which means Dharma teachings. Giving material things 
means to give other beings what they need, be it food, medicine, 
clothing, or shelter. By this type of generosity we are able to relieve 
their suffering and distress. The second, protection against fear, is to 
give the means to relieve suffering. Whether beings endure physical or 
mental pain, we should provide care so that they will feel more at ease 
and not be unhappy. The third, the giving of the truth, is giving 
Dharma teachings. This entails offering the methods on how to reduce 
disturbing emotions, advice in what to avoid and adopt; and giving 
special teachings on how to practice the true spiritual path. 
The second of the six paramitas is that of transcendent discipline, 
which is also of three types. The first is the discipline of refraining 
from evil-in other words, avoiding any action, speech or attitude that 
is harmful towards others or to onesel£ The second is the discipline of 
creating goodness, which means to act, speak, and harbor an attitude 
SoNGS OF NAROPA 
that is benevolent and helpful. The third one is called 'the discipline of 
acting for the welfare of other beings.' The first two refer to our own 
behavior, what we avoid or adopt, while the third is to do something 
that helps and benefits other beings. 
The third of the six paramitas is that of transcendent patience. The 
first type is called 'the patience of taking no offense when hurt'. When 
ordinary people are harmed by others, the natural response is to retal­
iate. If we investigate the outcome of taking revenge, however, we find 
the end result is only more pain, as it is motivated by anger or resent­
ment. Retaliation doesn't delete the previous hurt; nor does it bring 
happiness. Thus to seek revenge is a mistaken idea. Instead, try to con­
tinue the practice you know, especially that of sustaining the natural 
state. In that way, be carefree about being hurt. 
The second type is called 'the patience of having definite confidence 
in what is to be realized,' which means not to fall prey to dis­
couragement. Do not be disheartened and think, "I do all this practice 
and nothing comes out of it. Maybe there is nothing to be realized; 
maybe all this effort is worthless." This is not true. Meditation training 
definitely leads us to a positive result. Having confidence and trust in 
that realization is the second kind of patience. The third is called 'the 
patience of gladly undertaking hardship,' -not minding if there are 
difficulties. We shouldn't give up, even when working for the benefit of 
self and others is not easy or smooth. To gladly undertake any hardship 
encountered and carry on is the patience of happily undertaking 
difficulties. 
The fourth of the six paramitas is that of exertion, perseverance, or 
diligence. It refers to diligence in doing what is good or beneficial and 
in avoiding what is harmful. Basically it is laziness that prevents us 
from being diligent. There are three types of laziness. The first is the 
basic laziness of being indolent; feeling "I can't do anything," and not 
wanting to either. The second one is the laziness of clinging to habitual 
activities; for example, having a strong tendency towards killing 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
animals. Because it's a habit, we aggressively feel, "I don't want to give 
it up; I don't even want to question it." 
The third form of laziness is called 'the laziness reinforced by 
oneself. This the laziness of self-deprecation, or discouraging onesel£ 
We may have all the circumstances that are necessary for persevering in 
special practice: we have a precious human body, complete with the 
eight freedoms and ten riches; we have met a spiritual teacher and 
received the teachings, and so forth. There is nothing that should 
prevent us from practice, yet. still we harbor thoughts like: "I cannot, 
I'm unable, I'm no good, I'm a bad person, I'm weak." Those types of 
indulgent thoughts are a form of laziness. These three types of laziness 
should definitely be abandoned. 
The fifth paramita is that of meditative concentration. There are 
two types: the mundane or worldly and the supramundane, beyond 
worldly states. Mundane concentration refers to meditation states we 
get into without having entered the practice of the true Dharma, the 
sublime truth. In other cases we may have entered Dharma practice, 
but we have not fully formed a true resolve towards enlightenment, 
towards benefiting others. Our concentration thus lacks a sound basis. 
It's true that the meditation state we cultivate without this true 
foundation can give temporary relief from suffering, and may provide 
states of subde pleasure and peace. However, since there is no sub­
stance within it for liberation and enlightenment, these experiences are 
temporary and always wear off. Because we always return to ordinary 
samsaric situations; these are called mundane levels of concentration. 
Supramundane meditation comes about from fully forming the re­
solve of bodhichitta. Engender the wish to abandon all obscurations, 
disturbing emotions and thoughts; and to truly accomplish the basis for 
benefiting others. Any practice we do on that foundation, even ordinary 
shamatha, becomes the support for bodhichitta. Furthermore, it un­
folds as the support for the profound insight of vipashyana that can be 
discovered and cultivated. This is why it is said that the true shamatha, 
SoNGS oF NAROPA 
which is the source or root of all virtues, is called transcendent con­
centration. 
The sixth paramita is that of transcendent knowledge. Knowledge is 
the most important of all because the root cause of samsaric existence is 
ignorance, the opposite of knowing. How do we develop knowledge? 
The Buddha has taught that we begin by learning. A certain type of 
knowledge results from studying what the Buddha taught. But it is not 
only the words of the Buddha from which we can learn. From the 
Tibetan Vajrayana perspective, the shastras -treatises that are com­
mentaries on the Buddha's words -are considered even more 
important. The reason is that in the sutras the Buddha would some­
times teach the definitive meaning, and other times would teach in a 
way that was more expedient. It was not always clear to people as to 
what was what. The commentaries by great panditas clearly distinguish 
what is the definitive and what is the expedient meaning. Studying 
these clarifies the words of the Buddha. Even more important than the 
treatises are the pith instructions. Instructions by the mahasiddhas of 
the past sometimes came in the form of dohas, spiritual poetry such as 
the vajra songs of Mahamudra. Even more beneficial are oral instruc­
tions from our own root teacher, which condense the essential points 
into a very applicable, concise way. We need to study, listen, and learn. 
That is the first step, the knowledge of learning. 
The second type of knowledge is the knowledge of reflection. The 
Buddha said: "Analyze my teachings as carefully as you would test gold 
before buying it." You don't unequivocally believe the seller who claims 
that the gold is pure. You need to test it yourself before buying it. 
There are various ways that people check gold: they can cut it, rub it on 
a stone, or melt it. Melted gold should have uniform properties all the 
way through. To feel confident a piece of gold is pure, we need to 
examine it thoroughly and gain certainty about it. The Buddha 
continued: "Don't accept my words without questioning. You must 
discriminate and examine them for yourself." It is always possible that a 
statement could have been misquoted or some extra words added. 
143 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
Perhaps we cannot easily differentiate whether the Buddha was 
referring to the definitive or expedient meaning. Therefore, we must 
investigate and analyze before reaching assurance. This certitude we 
arrive at is called 'the knowledge from reflection'. 
The third type of knowledge is called 'the knowledge from 
meditation training'. We do not relinquish disturbing emotions by sim­
ply knowing how to do so: that comes about from growing used to 
abandoning them. It results from training, and from personal applic­
ation of the knowledge that arises from that. By training in a sustained 
way, we come to the point where we can actually abandon disturbing 
emotions. 
I have now briefly mentioned the ten virtuous actions, the ten 
unvirtuous actions and the six paramitas. Occasionally differences arise 
as to what is correct or not correct. Ultimately it depends on the 
circumstances and the individual's attitude and motivation. We have to 
judge very carefully the distinction between what is right and wrong. 
For example, to take a life is usually a very negative evil action that 
creates suffering and conflict. Nevertheless, there are rare occasions 
when taking a life can be very beneficial. For instance, there's a famous 
story about one of the past lives of the Buddha, when he was captain of 
a ship with 500 merchants traveling aboard. On the same ship was a 
criminal who wanted to kill the 500 merchants by sinking the vessel. 
The captain discovered this and decided to kill the criminal before he 
killed the others. It may have looked like a negative action, but actually 
it was very expedient; as the lives of 500 people were saved. Back to the 
text, and the line that states, "All good deeds and harmful actions 
dissolve by simply knowing this nature." In general, without knowing 
this nature, it is definitely important to avoid all involvement in evil 
actions; and to do as many positive actions as possible. During the 
actual situation of knowing the natural state, however, there's little 
reason to be either attached to virtuous actions or be afraid of unvir­
tuous ones, because all frames of mind dissolve into the basic state.+ 
144 
14 
I WILL NOW CONTINUE with the Mahamudra of conduct. The root 
verse says: "All good deeds and harmful actions, dissolve by simply 
knowing this nature." It is not only good and bad thoughts that are 
liberated by knowing the nature of mind. Disturbing emotions, are 
transformed as well into the great wisdom, original wakefulness. 
The Buddha mentioned different types of disturbing emotions in 
various contexts. For instance, in the collection of scriptures that 
belong to Abhidharma, he spoke of the ten primary disturbing emo­
tions and the twenty subsidiary disturbing emotions. However, the 
most familiar classification for the disturbing emotions in both Sutra 
and Tantra is the three or five poisons, which are attachment, anger, 
delusion, pride and envy. 
These five disturbing emotions have the nature of the five great wis­
doms. When speaking of transforming disturbing emotions into 
wisdom or original wakefulness, we should first of all understand what 
the root of a disturbing emotion is. They all have a common basis -
ignorance or unknowing, the source from which all disturbing emo­
tions unfold. Ignorance means to be unaware of the real condition, the 
basic state. It is because of ignorance that confusion can take place and 
unfold as disturbing emotions. 
145 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
Disturbing emotions lack the quality of being clear and lucid. Wis­
dom is seeing things exactly as they are. There are two aspects of 
wisdom, the first being the wisdom of knowing the unconditioned 
nature as it is, and the second being the wisdom of seeing all condi­
tioned things that can possibly exist. The first one is to realize that no 
phenomenon has any true identity; that all things are empty of any 
essence. Does that mean that an enlightened person in a state of wis­
dom does not perceive anything? Is enlightenment a vacant, dull state? 
No, absolutely not. While knowing the innate nature, there is a clear 
and distinct seeing of the relative aspect. That is the second type, 'the 
wisdom that sees all possibly existent conditioned things'. 
To go into more detail, the five wisdoms represent five aspects of 
original wakefulness. The first, the quality of seeing the empty essence, 
is called dharmadhatu wisdom, while seeing that all phenomena are 
equal in nature, or are of the same taste, is the wisdom of equality. 
These two wisdoms primarily belong to the wisdom that knows the 
nature as it is. The remaining three aspects of wisdom -the mirror-like 
wisdom, the discriminating wisdom and the all-accomplishing wisdom 
-primarily belong to the wisdom that sees all possibly existing things. 
To reiterate, ignorance is to be unaware of our basic nature. Some 
teachings, when speaking of transformation or of purifying the five dis­
turbing emotions, say that by abandoning the five poisons one realizes 
the five wisdoms. Other scriptures that have a slightly higher 
perspective say that the five disturbing emotions are basically trans­
formed into the five wisdoms. Whichever way it is phrased, the five 
disturbing emotions dissolve and the five wisdoms unfold as part of the 
transformative process. Let's look at this process more closely, 
examining the disturbing emotions and their accompanying wisdoms 
one by one. 
The first of the disturbing emotions is delusion. The opposite of de­
lusion is to be aware of the innate nature. By growing accustomed to 
that, the quality of not knowing gradually fades away. We call that the 
transformation of ignorance or delusion into the wisdom of dharma-
SoNGS oF NAROPA 
dhatu. The nature of all phenomena is seen as 'nonarising'; and is 
indivisible with the basic sphere or dharmadhatu. 
The mirror-like wisdom is the basic purity of or the transformation 
of anger. Due to not knowing our innate nature, there is an instinctive 
attachment to the belief in a 'me'. At the same time, there is an 
instinctive aversion towards that felt to be 'not me'-the 'other'. This 
clinging is very deep-rooted and gives rise to. intense fixation and 
manifold complexities. At the same time, there is always the possibility 
of the mirror-like wisdom. The analogy here is that of a mirror: an 
image reflected in a mirror appears very distinctly, even though there is 
no 'thing' in the mirror. It is empty of any substantial entity and yet 
visible. Once someone realizes the basic state and sees the empty nature 
of all things, experience still takes place. Experience unfolds like the 
images reflected in a mirror. Everything is seen, but there is no 
attachment to these images as having any concrete substance. In this 
way, there is no opportunity for anger to arise. 
The wisdom of equality is the transformation of pride. Seven kinds 
of pride are mentioned in the scriptures. Basically, pride or conceit, 
however, is the attitude of regarding others as inferior and oneself as 
superior. It is based on cultivating a fondness for ourselves as special 
and then focusing on that in a sustained way, out of ego-clinging. 
There are different degrees of being conceited; for instance, the fixation 
on oneself as extraordinary and other people as inferior. To regard 
oneself as superior among equals is a medium type of pride, while 
feeling superior to people who are even better than oneself is extreme 
conceit. Then there is the pride of believing oneself to have qualities 
that one doesn't, and the conceit of thinking oneself to be free of faults 
that one does have. These types of pride all dissolve when one grows 
more accustomed to realizing the real condition. It fades away and 
leaves place for what is called the wisdom of equality or sameness. This 
wisdom comes from seeing that everyone in their basic nature is equal. 
There is not even a mustard-seed of difference in the qualities of the 
basic nature of anyone. That is called the wisdom of equality. 
147 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
Discriminating wisdom is the transformation of attachment. Not 
knowing the basic state, we lack clarity as to what is beneficial and 
harmful, what is good and evil. Real discrimination is missing. This 
attachment and involvement create a tremendous amount of complica­
tions because we are unable to see clearly what is valuable and what is 
unwholesome. Conversely,. as we grow more accustomed to knowing 
the nature of Mahamudra, the real condition, this attachment dissolves 
and is changed into discriminating wisdom. Discriminating wisdom 
means realizing emptiness; through which everything is seen exactly as 
it is, distinctly and unblurred. 
All-accomplishing wisdom is the transformation of envy. We often 
become envious when seeing other people's qualities, happiness, good 
fortune, wealth and enjoyments, thinking: 'Why shouldn't I have 
that?" We are unhappy when others have something we don't, and 
based on this feeling, we may wish to harm them. This envy prevents 
us from carrying out the tasks we need to accomplish. When we try to 
undermine other people, we cause unhappiness not only for ourselves 
but for them as well. Any involvement motivated out of envy creates 
misery. The more we train in the nature of Mahamudra, the more envy 
subsides and dissolves. It transforms into the ability to carry out what 
needs to be carried out, which is called the all-accomplishing wisdom. 
Exactly how do the five poisons transform into the five wisdoms? In 
the Sutra teachings, the Buddha taught how to deal with disturbing 
emotions through five different methods of changing oneself. The first 
method is to keep one's distance from emotions. Try to be clear about 
the negative characteristics of involvement in disturbing emotions. 
Understand that being hateful and undertaking actions that cause dis­
quiet brings nothing but suffering. Out of attachment we become 
involved in various miseries. Remember that the disturbing emotions of 
anger, delusion, pride and jealousy are not beneficial in the slightest, 
but are extremely harmful. Again and again they create problems for 
ourselves and others. Engender the attitude that, "It's a bad idea to 
continue like that. I should change." This frame of mind doesn't totally 
148 
SoNGs oF NAROPA 
eliminate our tendencies to be involved in disturbing emotions. Still, it 
makes it easier to not leap directly into them the next time the 
opportunity arises. Hence the first step is called 'keeping distance'. 
The second remedy is called 'reducing disturbing emotions'. This 
doesn't mean suppressing them, in the sense that we take a disturbing 
emotion and force it down. It is a progressive occurrence that takes 
place naturally as a result of shifting our attention away from normal 
involvement in an emotion. We do this by cultivating a concentrated, 
calm state of mind again and again. Through practicing shamatha, 
through deeply relaxing, we keep out of complex entanglements, and 
our mind gradually becomes more peaceful. By developing a sense of 
presence of mind which helps us to be attentive and alert in any 
situation; we are more likely to notice whether or not we are getting 
carried away by disturbing emotions. Before training in the 
concentrated, calm state of mind of shamatha, we didn't even notice 
ourselves becoming lost in anger attachment, jealousy, pride. Now, 
because of being more mindful, we become aware of when these 
emotions take place. Due to the cultivation of mindfulness, calmness 
and openness, it's easier to refrain from getting further entangled in a 
disturbing emotion. This natural subsiding or diminishing is therefore 
called the remedy of'reducing disturbing emotions'. 
The third remedy the Buddha taught is called the remedy of 
'uprooting disturbing emotions', which means to totally obliterate the 
emotion from its very core This elimination is thorough and complete, 
not merely a temporary release. In terms of the Sutra teachings, it be­
comes possible when one has become accustomed to directly seeing the 
basic state of the emptiness of disturbing emotions. According to 
Vajrayana, involvement in disturbing emotions falls away through 
cultivating insight into the natural state of Mahamudra, or the Great 
Perfection of Ati Yoga. This is not the case for someone who hasn't 
fully stabilized insight into the basic nature. This insight is called 'clear 
seeing' or vipashyana in the Sutra system. If our level of proficiency in 
recognizing our nature is sporadic, with no true sustained stability, then 
149 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
we will not always be able to allow a disturbing emotion to dissolve. It 
is necessary is to apply the practice of Mahamudra directly in these in­
stances. It does not help much to merely claim that the basic nature of 
this emotion is emptiness. Rather, at the moment the disturbing 
emotion arises, look nakedly into that which feels angry or attached. 
You will immediately see the reality of the nature of this disturbing 
emotion as being totally devoid of any concrete identity. We see it as it 
is because it is empty. In the moment of seeing that there is no 
substance to that which gets involved in the disturbing emotion, the 
disturbing emotion dissolves and is liberated. When we grow stable in 
recognizing and make this practice an actuality, we no longer become 
involved in the disturbing emotion. That is 'uprooting' in the true sense 
of the word, isn't it? 
Naropa says: "The emotions are the great wisdom; like a jungle fire, 
they are the yogi's helpers." When a jungle catches fire, the bigger the 
jungle the bigger the fire. Since we are beginners, the more we can 
apply the remedy, the more opportunity there is for realizing wisdom, 
basic wakefulness. In this way the emotions are helpers or assistants for 
the practitioner. 
Second, stating the nature of the Mahamudra of equal taste: 
How can there be staying or going? 
What meditation is there by fleeing to a hermitage? 
Without understanding this, all possible means 
Never bring more than temporary liberation. 
To continue: "How can there be any staying or going?" This means 
that even while walking or moving about, of course we can still realize 
this nature. Our nature does not go anywhere or stay anywhere; it is al­
ways with us. It cannot possibly be some 'thing' that either stays or 
goes. Similarly, it does not become more present by going to the 
mountains and living in a hermitage. Our nature does not change 
according to circumstances. Therefore, moving about, staying some-
ISO 
SoNGS oF NAROPA 
where, going or not going to the mountains -all these are superficial 
attributes that are not found in the basic nature itself. 
If you have any questions, you can ask now. 
Student: Could you please clarify what it means when Naropa says: 
"While neither cultivating nor not cultivating, how can you be separate 
or not separate!" I didn't fully understand. 
Rinpoche: Let's look at the first part, "While neither cultivating nor not 
cultivating." The basic nature of Mahamudra is not made out of any­
thing whatsoever- it's just naturally so. It's definitely not some 'thing' 
that is gradually cultivated. Does this mean we should be totally frivo­
lous and let things run wild? No, it doesn't; it's incorrect to simply let 
go and get carried away into disturbing emotions and distraction. The 
basic nature is not something to be cultivated, but it shouldn't be 
forgotten either. We still need presence of mind. The next line, "How 
can you be separate or not separate!" means that our nature itself is 
already free from disturbing emotions, free from conceptual thought 
and obscuration. It does not need to be separated from or divested of 
anything. Yet, at the same time we cannot possibly be separate from 
this nature. Even while involved in conceptual thoughts or disturbing 
emotions, the very identity of this involvement, the essence, is still 
dharmakaya, so it is never apart or separate. 
Student: What is the connection between the "jungle fire" and the yogi? 
Rinpoche: The jungle fire is an analogy for the strength and power of 
the yogi's realization. The denser the jungle is, the stronger the fire will 
be. If the yogi in actuality experiences the basic nature of Mahamudra, 
then the more thoughts and emotions he has, the stronger the clarity, 
the bliss and the experience of the basic wakefulness will be. 
Student: Rinpoche, do you, personally, think? That is my first question. 
The second is that every day we finish with your long-life supplication. 
Why do you sing along? 
Rinpoche: In answer to the first question, I must say that I have no 
special or superior qualities, nor any extraordinary realization. I do have 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
thoughts; I have disturbing emotions - I have them all. Just because I 
give teachings doesn't mean that I have totally realized Mahamudra. 
What it means is that I have been fortunate to meet some very great 
masters and to have received pith instructions that I consider extremely 
profound and beneficial. Out of this appreciation I try to practice them 
myself, and I feel if other people could understand these instructions, 
take them to heart and realize what these teaching are, they will receive 
strong benefit. This is the reason that I give teachings like these on 
Mahamudra. 
About the long-life supplication: my students chant it, and they 
mean it. They want me to have a long life and good health; which is 
very nice. Whether it actually helps or not, it's still expressed out of a 
good heart and a sincere attitude, so from that angle it is very nice. 
When they're chanting, I feel that there's no point in me sitting quietly. 
There's no specific value from keeping silent. And as there's no real 
harm in me joining the chant, I feel like I can just as well sing along. 
Why not? 
Student: What is the cessation of thought like for someone who has 
realized Mahamudra? Does he become numb and insensitive, like a 
vegetable or a stone? 
Rinpoche: You must realize the difference between 'thought' and 
'supreme knowledge'. The Tibetan word for an ordinary thought is 
namtog, which automatically means that there is fixation in terms of 
feeling something is pleasant or unpleasant; in terms of liking or dis­
liking it. A feeling of attachment or aversion characterizes involvement 
in namtog. Practitioners who have realized Mahamudra do not at all 
become insensitive like a vegetable or a stone. They experience supreme 
knowledge, and are fully endowed with the five aspects of wisdom. 
Everything is known clearly and distinctly, but not in the same way as 
ordinary thought activity, which conceptualizes, labels, likes and 
dislikes. 
I am happy that you wonder 'Will the practice of Mahamudra 
eliminate conceptual thoughts?" Please use that interest to continue the 
SoNGs oF NAROPA 
practice of Mahamudra, and later you can look back and see: "Are there 
any thoughts left now, or not?" Then you will clearly know. 
Student: Rinpoche, when you talk about uprooting disturbing 
emotions, does that entail a physical act of abruptly turning about, or is 
it a mental act to meet the emotion head-on? 
Rinpoche: The phrase used is 'mind looking into mind', and the word 
'looking' is in the sense of using the eye. This is of course an example, 
an analogy. What it means is to see directly. We experience the 
emptiness instantaneously, not in a roundabout way through construct­
ing an idea about it to facilitate understanding. We simply let mind 
experience directly how its nature is. That is what is meant. Dealing 
with disturbing emotions can be a direct looking into the identity- or 
the lack of identity -of that which feels the emotion. It can also be 
the realization that comes about naturally by growing more accustomed 
to recognition. So, whether the disturbing emotion is cut through and 
dissolved at that very moment or whether it already has dissolved and 
does not arise any more -these two are actually basically the same. 
There's a particular and profound reason to use the word 'looking' 
or 'seeing' rather than 'figuring out' or 'understanding', because this is 
not merely a personal problem -it's a general problem. When it 
comes to looking into the nature of mind, most people have a tendency 
to get caught up in understanding the nature of mind in conceptual 
terms. This conceptual understanding obscures the direct knowing of 
the nature. It is remarkable, in a way, that someone who is simple­
minded and uneducated often has an easier time understanding 
instructions in Mahamudra. When he hears the instruction, "Look into 
your own nature," that person will simply and directly look into his or 
her own nature, without making too many ideas about it. On the other 
hand, someone who is educated and clever, will, when told to look, not 
look immediately. Instead he will conceptualize something to be 
understood out of that-"This is what I understand and it's such-and­
such," and he will create all kinds of labels. Instead of perceiving 
directly, he tries to deduce from the experience what the nature of 
153 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
mind is. This problem needs to be overcome. Do not confuse the 
inferred understanding with the direct experience! 
So: is it all right if I sing along with my long-life supplication? 
[Laughter.]+ 
I 54 
15 
EARLIER I EXPLAINED HOW the five disturbing emotions are trans­
formed into the five wisdoms. In connection with that, I will now 
define the different aspects of mind. The V aibhashika and the 
Sautrantika schools of Buddhist philosophy describe mind as being the 
six collections of consciousness, the six aspects of cognition, while in 
the Mind-Only School, eight aspects are defined. It is these eight 
aspects of cognition that, through practice, are transformed into the 
five wisdoms. 
These six or eight aspects of consciousness are, of course, defined by 
means of intellectual analysis. These divisions are not about external 
things outside of ourselves, but are various aspects of our inner minds. 
Knowing about them will help us notice progress in meditation 
practice when we check to see how our meditation is improving. 
The first of these aspects are the five sense consciousnesses, or sense 
cognitions. Consciousness becomes involved in the five sense objects 
through the five senses, as I briefly mentioned earlier. Through the eyes 
there is seeing, through the ears hearing, through the tongue tasting, 
through the nose smelling, and through the skin tactile sensation takes 
place. These five sense cognitions happen without any further involve­
ment as to whether what is perceived is good or bad, pleasant or 
unpleasant. No particular concepts are formed within those cognitions 
155 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
themselves. Therefore it is said that the five sense cognitions are 
nonconceptual. The sixth aspect is the mind consciousness which 
performs the function of associating the sense input in terms of past, 
present and future, good and bad, etc. 
The seventh aspect of consciousness is called 'disturbed mind con­
sciousness', and is something that is ongoing. It is definitely a quality of 
ego-clinging, but is not as pronounced in the way of the thought "I 
am" as is the sixth consciousness. Rather, the disturbed mind 
consciousness is like a subtle background noise; an ongoing feeling of 
holding onto itself. This is present in every situation, whether we are 
awake or asleep. 
The eighth is called the 'all-ground consciousness', or the alaya­
vijnana in Sanskrit. It is also a type ofbackground consciousness in the 
sense that it is the ongoing clarity or the conscious quality of mind. 
The alaya is what allows for any experience to take place, whether there 
is or isn't any thought involvement, whether or not we are interpreting 
the input that is presented through the senses. The quality of being 
able to cognize, to be awake, aware, and so forth, is something which is 
steady and continuous. Through all our beginningless lifetimes, this 
all-ground consciousness has been the basis for the habitual tendencies 
that recreate the different ways we perceive things. This is why it is 
called the all-ground consciousness. 
The seventh and the eighth are called ongoing aspects of conscious­
ness because they are continually present. Of course, all composite 
things are impermanent, being of a momentary nature, but this 
moment-to-moment presence of the seventh and eighth conscious­
nesses is continuous in the sense of being incessantly repeated. When 
we practice meditation, what is it that practices? It couldn't be the five 
sense cognitions because they are not always present. When there is 
seeing, the cognition of sight is present, but when the mind switches 
away from paying attention to a visual object, there's no seeing; there is 
no cognition of sight present. Sound cognition is present when we hear 
a sound, but when we don't hear anything it's no longer present. 
SoNGS oF NAROPA 
There's no steady occurrence of the five sense cognitions at all. They 
are sporadic, occurring only from time to time. So, when we are asked, 
"Is it the five sense cognitions who practice meditation?", we have to 
say, "No, it isn't." They simply occur from time to time in a thought­
free or nonconceptual way. 
What about the seventh and the eighth aspects, the disturbed mind 
consciousness and the all-ground consciousness -are they the ones 
cultivating the meditation state? No, they aren't; because they are, 
respectively, a vague lack of clarity and a steady ongoing conscious 
presence. They don't cultivate anything in terms of stillness or insight, 
shamatha and vipashyana. As we progress through the bhumis, the 
bodhisattva levels, they are transformed and gradually fade away until 
they vanish. That's why you can't say that the seventh and eighth 
consciousnesses are the ones practicing meditation. 
So, who or what exactly is it that practices meditation? We have to 
say it is the mind consciousness, the sixth aspect, which refers to that 
which thinks. We see sights, and notice various sounds, smells, tastes 
and textures. Accompanying those experiences is an act of 
conceptualizing which attaches labels and values to what is perceived 
-"This is nice, this is not nice." It's the mind consciousness which 
associates judgments with these sense impressions. Is it conceptual or 
non-conceptual? It is certainly conceptual, as it creates an untold 
number of different thoughts, ideas and notions about this and that. 
This mind consciousness does not perceive objects directly. The 
learned masters of the past had a name for what the sixth consciousness 
apprehends- donchi, which means 'mental image'. This mental image 
is presented in our mind and is then fused together with all sorts of 
different associations -for instance the name of the particular object. 
Let's take the example of a pillar. The sixth consciousness will create 
the idea of 'pillar' by fusing together a conglomeration of various 
impressions based on all of one's past memories about different pillars 
-thin, thick, ornamented and unadorned. These are put together in 
one generic image which we connect with the word pillar. The sixth 
157 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
consciousness associates and identifies a certain sense imprint -what 
is simply presented through the senses -as being a pillar. This is 
different from the visual cognition, which is simply a direct sense 
impression of what is present. Sense cognition does not attach any 
labels or values -it is non-conceptual. it is the mind consciousness 
which starts to classify and define the current image. Through this 
process it creates an idea and some structure as to what it is we 
perceive. It culls memories from the past and premonitions of the 
future, melts these together with many other things and labels that mix 
with the name pillar. So, among the eight consciousnesses, only the 
mind consciousness meditates. In other words, it is the thinker who 
cultivates the meditation state. Instead of giving in to the normal 
tendencies of thinking and being involved in emotions; catch hold of 
the activity of this mind consciousness with attentive presence. Being 
careful and relaxing this mind consciousness can generate a new habit 
of being more quiet and less lost in thoughts and concepts. When mind 
consciousness relaxes and becomes less involved in conceptualizing, 
that is exactly what is called shamatha, the calm state of concentrated 
attention. 
How is vipashyana or insight cultivated through the sixth 
consciousness? Up until this point I have said that the sixth 
consciousness is conceptual, but that only refers to when it is extro­
verted. Thoughts and concepts are created when it faces away from 
itself, towards externally perceived objects. When the sixth conscious­
ness is turned on itself, however, it has a non-conceptual, thought-free 
quality. This is entirely possible because the eight consciousnesses all 
have a self-knowing capacity; described as rang-rig in Tibetan. This 
quality of'knowing-by-itself' does not need any other agent in order to 
know. When we see, we don't need somebody else to tell us that we 
see. We know that a visible object is being seen. It is the same with the 
other senses: we naturally hear, smell, taste, and feel. When thoughts 
and emotions occupy our attention, we know that we are thinking or 
feeling. This self-knowing is a sense of being naturally aware. What 
SoNGS oF NAROPA 
exactly is it that experiences? What is it that sees when the sixth 
consciousness is turned on itself to see? There is a direct self-knowing 
that the experiencer is not made out of anything whatsoever. It's like a 
breeze moving through empty space. To phrase it another way; there is 
a seeming yet insubstantial movement that is possible to perceive 
directly without any inference at all. 
Buddhist philosophical logic makes use of an amusing example. It is 
said that the five sense cognitions are like a mute person who can see 
objects but can't talk about them. There is a bare seeing, hearing, 
smelling, tasting and touching, with no concepts connected to them. 
They are direct impressions through the senses. Mind consciousness, 
on the other hand, is like a very talkative person who is blind. He can 
describe things quite eloquently, but can't actually see them. Obviously 
there's a problem here. How do we get these two aspects together? This 
is where the self-knowing quality comes in. It links together the mute 
sense cognitions with the blind act of conceptualizing. It creates a 
connection between the sense impressions and the conceptual mind 
consciOusness. 
Practicing meditation is unlike the ordinary state of mind that is al­
ways occupied by this and that. When not meditating, there is no real 
noticing of this naturally cognizant, self-knowing quality. Meditation 
training means to cultivate, grow used to, and be aware of this self­
knowing quality. During the meditation state all the thought activity 
and general busyness of the sixth consciousness is allowed to calm 
down, to subside. All eight aspects of consciousness have a peaceful, 
tranquil quality. During this state it is possible to have clear seeing, in 
other words, to know this naturally cognizant quality. 
How are these consciousnesses transformed into the five wisdoms as 
we progress in meditation training? The five sense cognitions accom­
plish the tasks at hand, but in their present ignorant, mistaken state, 
they function in an imperfect way. When we see, we don't see 
completeness; we don't see things exactly as they are. Something may 
be too far away, or concealed; or most often our way of perceiving is 
159 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
not really correct. It is the same with the other sense impressions. 
However, as we progress in the meditation state, whatever needs to be 
carried out is fully and truly done; the tasks are all accomplished. That 
is why the transformation of the five sense cognitions is called the all­
accomplishing wisdom. 
The sixth consciousness, the mind consciousness, usually performs 
the function of discriminating between what is good and evil, pleasant 
and unpleasant, clinging to and fixating upon the notions we form. 
This mistakenness falls away and subsides as we gradually transcend it 
through practice. Eventually the sixth consciousness is transformed 
into discriminating wisdom. 
The seventh, the disturbed mind consciousness, is usually described 
as subtle ego-clinging that is continually present. This inherent feeling 
that this 'I' here is more important than that 'other' over there is the 
basis for disturbing emotions. It is the act of clinging to the duality of 
perceiver and perceived, to self and other, regarding self as more 
important than other. The great master Chandrakirti in his Madhya­
maka Avatara says that the disturbed mind consciousness is trans­
cended at the eighth stage of the bodhisattva path. From that point 
onwards there is a sense of equality of self and other. Even though 
duality hasn't totally fallen away, the tendency to regard self more 
important than other has subsided. It is said that the transformation of 
the disturbed mind consciousness is the wisdom of equality. 
Now we have only the eighth left -the all-ground consciousness, 
often explained as the basis for habitual tendencies. The habitual 
tendencies that we created throughout past lifetimes ripen in this life, 
in the sense that they structure how we hear and see, perceive and 
think. It is exactly like a fruit ripening, in that something created in the 
past gradually and naturally unfolds. At the same time we are currently 
creating new habitual tendencies. Our moment-to-moment frame of 
mind forms new habitual tendencies that will ripen at some time in the 
future. The habitual tendency is the cause, the seed. It's just like 
putting money in a bank. Think of the all-ground consciousness as the 
x6o 
SoNGS OF NAROPA 
storehouse or the bank where all these tendencies are kept. We speak of 
two aspects, causal and resultant. When the transformation of the 
resultant aspect is completed, it is called dharmadhatu wisdom, which 
is the empty quality. When the cause, the seed quality of this all­
ground is transformed, it is called mirror-like wisdom. 
Let's go over this once more, briefly. Among these eight aspects of 
consciousness, that which practices meditation, that which cultivates 
and performs the training, is the sixth. This mind consciousness also 
makes most of the mistakes in what we do and how we experience. 
When we apply the trainings of shamatha and vipashyana to this mind 
consciousness, the confusion and busyness of thought gradually 
subsides. We train in knowing the very nature of this consciousness 
and getting more and more accustomed to realizing exactly how it is. 
By becoming used to the natural state, this consciousness is liberated. 
This is why Naropa says: 'Without understanding this," -without 
realizing one's nature -"All possible means can never bring more than 
temporary liberation." This is the way to be liberated. Trying to 
accumulate merit and experiencing the results of that merit in samsara 
does bring temporary freedom, but it is only through realizing the 
natural state that any permanent liberation is possible. 
Third, stating the nature of Mahamudra of indivisibility: 
When understanding this nature, what is there to bind 
you? 
While being undistracted from its continuity, 
There is neither a composed nor an uncomposed state 
To be cultivated or corrected with a remedy. 
The numberless troubles that we undergo, all the hardship and an­
guish that accompany samsaric states come about from one cause -
the lack of knowing our basic nature. All this bewilderment and 
confusion is due to ignorance. As long as this ignorance persists, we 
will continue in pain. When we clear up ignorance, all its resultant 
161 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
problems, obstacles and hindrances no longer occur. Or, as Naropa 
says, 'When understanding this nature, what is there to bind you?" 
When training in Mahamudra, we are supposed to practice in a way 
in which shamatha and vipashyana, stillness and insight, are united. 
We speak of the samadhi of the meditative practice and the samadhi of 
post-meditation, when one is walking, sitting, talking, or doing various 
kinds of physical work. At that time do not to let your mind wander, 
but be as attentive as you are in your meditation practice. It is especially 
important to sustain the experience of the nature of mind during the 
activities of your daily life. This way of training in the samadhi of post­
meditation will assist the samadhi of the main practice, the meditation 
state itsel£ Likewise, training in the meditation state itself will help 
improve the samadhi of the post-meditation. 
Sustaining the practice of post-meditation is not necessarily that 
easy for a beginner. It is difficult to mingle the experience of this 
practice with daily activities, or when involved in disturbing emotions. 
We find that we get distracted again and again. We forget to practice, 
or feel it's inconvenient to practice while doing something. Don't give 
up just because it's hard. The more we persevere in the training, the 
easier it will be. In the beginning, apply short moments of recognition. 
Later on, you'll find your ability to remember to practice in daily life 
situations will naturally increase. There is a definite benefit from train­
ing during daily life situations. Practice does not prevent or impede 
carrying out daily tasks, and at the same time is extremely helpful for 
progressing in the meditation state itself. 
Now we are at the third point about the Mahamudra of conduct, at 
the line where Naropa says: 'While being undistracted from its 
continuity." While we are training in the experience of the empty and 
cognizant nature; we are not distracted. Remaining like that, "there is 
neither a composed nor an uncomposed state." 'Composed' means 
trying to place the mind in a way in which it stays in equanimity. This 
is not necessary when recognizing the nature of mind. There is no need 
to make an extra composed state in addition to being undistracted. 
162 
SoNGS OF NAROPA 
While experiencing the nature of mind, there is no opportunity to be 
involved in thoughts or emotions, so therefore it is also not an 
uncomposed state. 
Let's look at the next line:"To be cultivated or corrected with a rem­
edy." A beginner inexperienced in the nature of mind may think: "I 
don't have any great qualities, so I must try to somehow create them 
through this practice. Ifl try hard enough, eventually they'll appear." In 
this way we attempt to bring forth and cultivate something that is not 
present. Or we might think that, "I have thoughts, but through this 
practice they can be eliminated," and try to get rid of our thoughts in 
meditation practice. This is not the way to practice Mahamudra. Please 
understand this point: It is essential to discern that the nature of mind 
does not possesses any flaws in the slightest. There is no need to re­
move any imagined faults. The nature of mind is naturally tranquil, 
with the quality of luminous wakefulness inherently present. There is 
no need to put effort into cultivating these qualities either. What we 
must do is to acknowledge and recognize what is already present, and 
allow it to be fully realized. 
There is still another way in which we could misunderstand this 
line, by mistakenly thinking that there is nothing to do, no meditation 
to carry out. To believe it's not necessary to remedy anything by 
practicing is incorrect. Once again I will repeat: we need to recognize 
our mind and experience the nature of Mahamudra. However, that 
which is recognized or experienced is inherently present within our 
basic nature. From that perspective, it is not necessary to recreate or 
fabricate what we already possess. This is an essential point. When we 
engage in meditation training, it may look like we are trying to sit and 
do something new. It may appear that we are creating a new entity or a 
sublime state that is not present in our minds. That is not the case. 
Instead, we are simply relaxing the habit of mistakenness that 
constantly stirs up confusion and concepts. We are releasing that ten­
dency and letting it dissolve. What we experience is not something new 
that never was. Rather, it is our intrinsic nature itself.+ 
16 
IN THIS TEACHING ON THE VIEW, meditation, conduct and fruition of 
Mahamudra, we have now come to the fourth, the Mahamudra of 
fruition. There are different results of practice, temporary and ultimate. 
When training in meditation, we need to distinguish between primary 
results and experiences and ordinary ones. 
Ordinary experiences can take the form of visions which appear in 
various types and ways. They may feel sublime or be horrible. We could 
hear voices and have manifold sensations. Ordinary experiences are not 
to be regarded as amazing, a great virtue, nor as some kind of huge 
mistake on our part. It is most beneficial if we attribute very little 
significance to such experiences. 
Read The Rain of Wisdom, also called The Ocean of Songs of the Kagyu 
Masters. In the chapter on Gampopa's songs, there is the story of how 
he received oral instructions from Milarepa. Gampopa had incredible 
experiences. Sometimes he would see the entire mandala of the yidam 
deity as white or red. Other times he had extraordinary experiences that 
were immensely pleasant. Occasionally he had downright awful 
experiences, like having a vision of the hell of black lines. Each time he 
would relate what he experienced to Milarepa and ask for advice about 
its meaning. Every time, Milarepa's response was: "This is not 
SoNGS oF NAROPA 
something good, nor is it something bad. Just continue your practice." 
So Gampopa simply continued his practice. 
Milarepa gave an analogy for how to regard these different experi­
ences. If you press your eyeball slightly while looking at the moon, 
immediately there's a vision of two moons. You might think this is 
extraordinary. "Hey, normally people only see one moon, but now I see 
two. This is incredible, a great experience!" Honestly, there is nothing 
special about that. Somebody else might think: "Oh no, normally 
people only see one moon and now I see two. I'm in great danger! 
What do I do about it? Maybe I'm making a big mistake." Milarepa's 
reply was that these experiences are neither special nor a great danger. 
They only come about because one is pressing one's eye. It's neither 
good or bad. In the same way, he instructed Gampopa, "These 
experiences come about because of focusing wholeheartedly on practice. 
Since all experiences are mental, all sorts of different visions take place, 
but they're neither extraordinarily good nor horribly bad. They're just 
. " expenences. 
If we attach great importance to what or how we feel and 
experience, we can make it quite unpleasant for ourselves. When good 
experiences occur, we start to think: "This is extraordinary. I must be 
someone special!," and become conceited because we had such-and­
such an experience. Such pride decreases our diligence in practice, 
causing an obstacle for progress. Or perhaps the experience we con­
sidered as being so important ceases, and we yearn to relive it. We try 
to recreate it through our practice, thinking: "I want to feel like that 
again." When we don't, the longing makes us unhappy and creates 
problems for our practice. 
On the other hand, we may become very fearful about our experi­
ences, worrying that what we feel is dangerous. Perhaps we are making 
a mistake, we feel. While the fear is not that strong in itself, it can 
become intense once we start to invest all of our attention into that 
little worry. We can blow it totally out of proportion and become 
obsessed by it, at which point it does become a big problem. Actually, 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
though, a little fear about how we feel is nothing special. All we have to 
think at that time is think, "There is nothing important to worry about. 
This is simply another experience." 
It's also possible to have a sudden experience of emptiness and be­
come either terrified or enthusiastic, feeling, "This is extraordinary- I 
am remarkable." Or we may have experiences of immense bliss or 
clarity. These are the three traditional experiences that are mentioned: 
bliss, clarity and nonthought. In none of these cases is it necessary to 
attach great value to how we feel. If we do, the attachment itself creates 
the obstacle. It's best to continue in a way where we feel at peace and 
tranquil. 
The great masters of the past mention that we need to bring every­
thing we encounter onto the path, that we should utilize whatever we 
meet as the path. The traditional way of describing this practice is the 
'four-fold taking as path.' The first of these four is called 'bringing joy 
and sadness onto the path'. The first one, joy, is when everything is 
going fine -we are successful; have enjoyments, wealth, good health, 
and friends. We naturally take joy in that; and feel happy about what is 
happening in our life. That is of course not such a bad thing, because 
all sentient beings want to be happy and enjoy. However, once we start 
to cling to the particular situation that brings us happiness, this 
fondness for the joy will turn to pain once the situation changes, since 
everything is impermanent and eventually perishes. Instead of being 
caught up in the frame of mind that takes joy in these circumstances, 
we should rather look into the very identity of that which feels happy. 
We will discover that it is not made out of anything whatsoever. It is 
empty of any identity. That is called 'bringing joy into the path'. 
Conversely, we feel pain when we feel sad or hurt, when we have 
misfortune or bad health. Often the thoughts come: "This is agonizing. 
I cannot bear it. It is just too much!" Just as you did with pleasure, look 
into what it is that feels this sadness. Once again you will not find a 
concrete entity anywhere. It is empty of any real substance. This is how 
to utilize joy and sadness as the path. 
166 
SoNGs oF NAROPA 
The second is called 'taking sickness onto the path'. Occasionally we 
experience physical pain. When our body is sick, it is not a mental 
state; we actually ache physically. We can neither ignore nor deny that 
something is wrong with our body. An ordinary person turns their 
hostility towards the sensation, thinking "I don't like it. I don't want to 
feel this." The pain then appears to be even more unbearable. As 
practitioners training in the profound meditation, we should try to 
bring physical pain into the path, to use it as the path. Severe sickness 
is not easy to deal with when one is a beginner, but a little pain is not 
too difficult. For example, if you take your fingers and squeeze them 
slightly it hurts a tiny bit, it's unpleasant, but not unbearable. At that 
moment, instead of getting involved in the aversion, look into what is it 
that feels this dislike, the hurt. As before, we find out that the feeling 
of pain is not made out of anything. It's empty in essence. While being 
empty, sensation is still present, but it's not unendurable because it is 
insubstantial. By experiencing bodily pain in this way, we are not 
overcome by it, and therefore it is called 'utilizing physical pain as the 
path'. 
The third is called 'utilizing disturbing emotions as path'. Disturb­
ing emotions are unlike mental or physical pain. Our attention directs 
itself in a coarse, almost concrete way. The strongest disturbing emo­
tions that we have of course are desire, anger, pride, and jealousy. 
There is also guilt and doubt. When these emotions take over our 
minds, we feel overpowered; we lose control and get caught up in the 
negative feelings. Take desire, for example: we become attracted to­
wards some concrete thing in our life or a living being. We may 
become completely preoccupied with being near that person or 
possessing that particular object. Desire creates disquiet and restless­
ness, and we are uncomfortable. It is similar with anger: we feel hostile 
towards a thing or person. It takes over our focus continuously and 
makes us deeply disturbed. It's the same with jealousy, pride, guilt, and 
so forth. These emotions make us uneasy, they unsettle us. 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
A practitioner needs to bring disturbing emotions onto the path. In­
stead of getting totally caught up in what we feel so strongly about, 
look into that which experiences the emotion: "Where is it felt? Where 
does this feeling arise out of? Where is it right now? How does it look? 
What is it made out of?" When we fail to find any concrete thing 
whatsoever, we are utilizing disturbing emotions as path. 
The fourth method is called 'bringing the bardo onto the path'. The 
bardo is the intermediate state between this life and the next. After this 
life has dissolved and the next rebirth has not yet unfolded, there is an 
in-between period where the consciousness undergoes various expe­
riences -sounds, colors, lights, and other manifestations. Because of 
the attachment to the normal events in our lives, we are deeply 
unsettled and intensely worried when we arrive in the bardo state. We 
think: "I don't know where to go. Oh no! Where will I take rebirth?" 
We are terrified and overcome by all sorts of immense anxieties. This 
situation, the bardo experience, needs to be brought onto the path. 
Here's how to do this. 
As Buddhist practitioners, we should strive to not be like an ordi­
nary person, who wants only to enjoy and be comfortable in this life. 
An ordinary person, by definition, doesn't give any thought to the fact 
that sooner or later we all die and whether we like it or not, we arrive in 
the bardo state. During the bardo ordinary people have nothing to hold 
onto, and they experience immense fear. Overcome by panic, distress, 
and despair, they may feel incredible regret for how they spent their 
life. Their intense uncertainty about what is going to happen to them is 
terrifying. In order to avoid this, we need to make sure right now that 
we do not end up totally unprepared for the bardo phenomena. 
Whether we do or not is entirely in our hands right now. We should 
repeatedly picture ourselves in the bardo state and imagine how it 
would be. This will help us to become more settled and self-assured so 
that we will not be totally bewildered or at a loss as to how to deal with 
that circumstance. It is extremely beneficial to bring the bardo state 
onto the path in this way. 
168 
SoNGS oF NAROPA 
Whether we are alive in a physical body or have passed on and are 
in the bardo state, the most important thing is to be stable-minded and 
level headed. Be steady in yourselves, and do not become totally 
overwhelmed by experiences; do not immediately get carried away by 
whatever takes place. This is an important quality to cultivate. Other­
wise, whenever we feel pain or anxiety, we will be totally caught up in 
it. Train now to be more balanced in your response to your emotions. 
Cultivating this quality through Dharma practice makes an incredible 
amount of difference as to whether we take an unfortunate rebirth or a 
good one. During the bardo state, it is said that we encounter the 
natural sound of dharmata, the intrinsic and empty lights, colors, and 
sounds. We can grow accustomed to these right now. Train first by 
sitting with closed eyes. At first everything is dark and we don't see a 
thing, but eventually shapes start to appear. There are bits of light that 
takes different forms, perhaps moving; maybe green, yellow, blue or 
red. Mter a while it is possible that these formations of light will start 
to become bigger. They could even become quite overwhelming, but 
you should remain completely relaxed. These appearances are not made 
out of anything. They are insubstantial, and there is no real place that 
these formations come out of, or dwell. There is nothing to be aston­
ished about; they are merely an expression of the empty nature. Once 
we grow slightly accustomed to these light formations that are the 
naturally empty lights of the innate nature, we have developed a kind of 
steadiness that will help us not to be overcome by the natural lights of 
dharmata in the bardo. 
Similarly, we can grow accustomed to the intrinsic sound of 
dharmata that occurs in the bardo state by sitting down in a quiet place 
with no noise and paying attention. We should direct our concen­
tration towards our hearing, not in an extroverted way, but tuning into 
a subtle sound that is present all by itself. Sometimes it helps to clench 
your teeth slightly and listen. There is a subtle roaring which you can 
hear more and more if you focus. It is not the sound of physical things 
clashing together, like a drum or any outer material objects. It is the 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
sound of our own nature. When we pay attention, we find that the 
sound is not coming from anywhere, it remains nowhere, and it is not 
made out of anything at all. While looking into the identity of this 
intrinsic sound, there is no identity to find. It's totally insubstantial. 
Simultaneously, there is the hearing of this sound vividly and distinctly. 
This is identical in nature with the natural sound of dharmata during 
the bardo state. If we can relax into the hearing without being appre­
hensive or caught up in it, we can avoid being overwhelmed by the 
natural sound of dharmata in the bardo state. 
We do encounter all these situations that I have described. We have 
pleasure, pain, joy and sorrow; we fall sick; we have disturbing 
emotions; and sooner or later we will have to go through the bardo. We 
need to accept the inevitability of these things. Not wanting to think 
about them doesn't help; they will still happen. We need to prepare 
ourselves for those situations without falling prey to anxiety, fear and 
unhappiness. It is much better if we become fully capable of 
encountering all circumstances right now, without being at a loss about 
what to do and where to go. The key point in all these four situations 
mentioned is settling into the equanimity of knowing the natural state 
of mind. The more we train in recognizing our nature, the more 
accustomed we become. We need to persevere diligently in order to 
reach proficiency. This is an essential point. 
In the Buddhist teachings, everything depends on the karma we 
created. However, two dominant factors are at play: the ripening of 
former karma and temporary circumstances. We may have a certain 
karmic course, but if we fall prey to temporary circumstances, panic, 
and start to be bewildered in the bardo state, we may make a terribly 
wrong choice. It's very important to be level-headed so that we can be 
calm about what we encounter in the bardo state. In this way we don't 
force ourselves into an unfortunate rebirth. We will have the oppor­
tunity to choose, and will be free to exert ourselves in taking the correct 
rebirth. From this perspective as well, this teaching is extremely 
important. 
170 
SoNGS OF NAROPA 
Once more, for the three points about the Mahamudra of 
fruition, first, stating the nature of the Mahamudra of what appears 
and exists: 
It is not made out of anything. 
Experience self-liberated is dharmadhatu. 
Thinking self-liberated is great wisdom. 
Nondual equality is dharmakaya. 
Let's go back to the text: "It is not made out of anything." The 'it' 
here refers to any experience you encounter, no matter what it is. There 
is no concrete substance; everything is empty in essence. Nevertheless, 
experience occurs unimpededly. The content of experience is a trans­
itory circumstance. Every moment of experience naturally vanishes -
"Experience self-liberated is dharmadhatu." The thinker, that which 
perceives and labels, likewise dissolves by itself -"Thinking self­
liberated is great wisdom." Thinking is like a bubble on the surface of 
water or like a gust of wind: neither is solid. Yet there is a seeming 
presence of awareness which is not made out of anything whatsoever. 
Ordinary people do not pay attention to the reality of this. Practitioners 
should look into that which thinks, and see its insubstantiality; watch 
the seeming thinker vanishing by itsel£ This is original wakefulness. In 
short, the perceived is dharmadhatu, while the perceiver is the 
luminous wakefulness. Hence, "Nondual equality is dharmakaya." 
These two aspects of experience -the perceiver and the perceived 
-are not only utterly insubstantial and empty of any concrete identity, 
they are an indivisible unity. This indivisible unity, here described as 
nondual equality, is the basic state, the reality of experience. Whether 
we realize it or not, it is our natural state. When through practice it is 
fully actualized, there's a state of great serenity. That is what is called 
the dharmakaya, the final fruition. 
If you have any questions, feel free to ask. 
Student: What's the connection between the bardo state and the eighth 
consciousness, the all-ground consciousness? 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
Rinpoche: Where does experience take place? Whether an experience 
belongs to this life, the next life or the bardo, it unfolds within the all­
ground consciousness. The all-ground consciousness is like the 
environment or atmosphere within which the ripening of past habitual 
tendencies manifests. It is also the place where the new tendencies we 
form are kept. For example, a small child, when shown a tiny circle, 
does not at first have any real ideas connected to that. first he is taught 
or imprinted with the association of the sound '0' to the circle. Later 
on, when he's reading a text, he sees the circle amid other letters and 
the sound '0' immediately comes to his mind. It does so 
spontaneously, without him having to think, question, or ask someone 
else. It has become a habit to associate a circle with the sound '0'. It is 
the same way with all habitual tendencies. The experiences that occur 
in the bardo state are also structured. Whether they are clear or unclear, 
or whether we feel at ease about them or uneasy, all depends upon the 
habitual tendencies that are stored in our all-ground consciousness. 
Student: In the context of becoming accustomed to the practice of the 
natural state in the bardo experiences, is that training stored in the sixth 
or in the eighth consciousness? 
Rinpoche: The predominant aspect of the consciousness that practices is 
the sixth mind consciousness. This is true whether we are in this life, 
the next life or in the bardo. The sixth consciousness is what accepts or 
rejects joy and sorrow, pleasure and pain. It creates thoughts about all 
the different experiences. However, the habitual tendencies formed by 
doing so are stored within the all-ground consciousness. In the context 
of bringing the bardo onto the path, we train in relaxing into the 
natural state while experiencing the intrinsic colors and sounds. The 
looking into the nature of that which experiences these is the 
nonconceptual aspect of the sixth consciousness. The habitual tendency 
for that training, however, is stored in the eighth consciousness. 
Student: What are the signs that you are proceeding correctly when you 
are practicing the path? 
SoNGS oF NAROPA 
Rinpoche: It is generally said that the sign of learning the Dharma is to 
be peaceful and gentle. The sign of being adept in Dharma practice is 
to be free of disturbing emotions. What that means is the more we 
learn about Dharma practice, the more easy-going we should become 
-gentle, disciplined and self-contained. The more we practice, the 
more in charge of our minds we should become, not immediately 
getting caught up in anger if we don't like something. We should be in 
control and not be immediately overrun by emotions. That is a sure 
sign of progress on the path.+ 
173 
17 
AMONG THE THREE POINTS about the Mahamudra of fruition, the 
first point was about the natural liberation of the perceiver and 
the perceived. The second point is about the indivisible nature of 
samsara and nirvana. 
Second, stating the nature of the Mahamudra of samsara and 
ntrvana: 
Like the continuous flow of a great river, 
Whatever you do is meaningful. 
This is the eternal awakened state, 
The great bliss, leaving no place for samsara. 
The first line-"Like the continuous flow of a great river," refers to 
diligence, exerting ourselves. We may be able to recognize the nature of 
mind; but to sustain it; exertion is necessary. Naropa uses the flow of a 
great river as an example. A great river flows continuously and effort­
lessly, at its own natural pace. That is a wonderful image for the type of 
diligence that is indispensable. 
The general teachings mention two kinds of diligence: one is called 
'devoted application', and the other 'constant application'. In devoted 
application, we try our best, our utmost, to apply effort and carcy on in 
that way. Constant application means one is not just diligent for a few 
174 
SoNGS OF NAROPA 
days, weeks, months or years, but continuously, in a sustained way. 
Devoted application is very important, but a sense of constancy in our 
exertion, especially in this context of training in the natural state of 
Mahamudra, is what is needed. The ordinary attitude ofbeing diligent 
and pushing doesn't allow our exertion to increase and develop. 
I will now explain the six types of diligence which the great 
bodhisattva Shantideva mentions in his Bodhicharya Avatara. The first 
step towards being truly diligent is sincere interest. Sincere interest 
comes about once we appreciate the value of something, that it's 
meaningful and worthwhile to pursue. Our attention is directed 
towards that and we exert ourselves. If we don't really understand the 
value, it's very hard to be really interested and diligent in accomplishing 
any task. 
The second factor is pride. The word 'pride' figures among the six 
primary disturbing emotions, but here the meaning is not the same, but 
rather has the connotation of confidence. It is the self-assurance that "I 
can do this; it is not impossible; not beyond me. I can practice and train 
in samadhi. It is meaningful and worthwhile." If we don't have self­
confidence and we think "I'm weak, I cannot eradicate my faults or 
promote good qualities, I cannot practice meditation," it's hard to ever 
be diligent. On the other hand, if we have a sense of pride that "This is 
possible, I can do it," we can be diligent. 
There's another reason for why we can feel confident in our ability 
to practice. Think of the life examples of the 84 great mahasiddhas of 
ancient India, who trained in samadhi in all sorts of different ways and 
attained accomplishment. As I mentioned before, many of these 
realized masters had occupations and lived and worked in the world. 
King lndrabhuti, for example, was very powerful. He had immense 
wealth and luxuries and many enjoyments. As ruler of a country he had 
innumerable tasks to attend to. Still, within this situation he focused 
his mind on the practice of realizing Mahamudra, and in that very 
lifetime attained supreme accomplishment. So, no matter what 
situation we find ourselves in; whether overindulgence in luxuries or 
175 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
overburdened by work, we can still continue and persevere in the prac­
tice. 
Another example is that of N agarjuna, an extremely learned great 
master who wrote many treatises and established various modes of rea­
soning. We might think that he had to engender immeasurable con­
cepts to figure out and define all these different things. Yet, by looking 
into the nature of what thinks within all this activity, Nagarjuna was 
able to continue the training in samadhi and attain supreme 
accomplishment. Even if one is a scholar and does a lot of intense con­
ceptual thinking, there is the possibility of pursuing and reaching 
enlightenment. 
Tilopa had very low-class jobs like pressing sesame seeds into oil. 
He even worked as the doorman at a brothel! While doing so, he cast 
away all pride and continued training in realizing Mahamudra. Later 
he was known as the mahasiddha Tilopa. Another mahasiddha actually 
worked as a coolie, digging and carrying dirt. While working he 
remained mindful, focusing on the practice of realizing the nature of 
Mahamudra. Eventually he too attained supreme accomplishment. 
It makes no difference whether one is male or female. There were 
female mahasiddhas as well, like the great masters Niguma and 
Sukhasiddhi, who attained supreme enlightenment and were able to 
display miraculous powers like flying through the sky. Thinking of all 
of these great practitioners, we can feel confident that we too can 
practice. 
The basis for being able to persevere, the basis for fortitude, is that 
all sentient beings do have a buddha nature, an enlightened essence. 
No matter who one is-whether an inferior or superior person- we 
all, without any exception, have an enlightened essence. Based on that, 
good qualities can unfold and negative traits can be eradicated. 
That type of perseverance was rooted in mind, our essential buddha 
nature. The next type is based on our physical situation as human 
beings. If we were born as another life form where we didn't have these 
capabilities, we wouldn't be able to persevere in Dharma practice to the 
SoNGS oF NAROPA 
same extent. Right now we possess what is called 'the precious human 
body' endowed with the eight freedoms and ten riches. We are capable 
of carrying out what needs to be carried out. We can be diligent in 
what is meaningful. Therefore, in regard to the body we have at the 
present time, we can feel confident that we are able to practice, and in 
this way be diligent. 
The second factor was pride or self-confidence; the third factor is 
enthusiasm. If we take pleasure in what we do, it doesn't seem difficult 
at all and it is easy to be diligent. Watch how children play. When they 
are engrossed in their games it doesn't matter if it's cold outside or 
whether they are a little hungry -they are happy to continue playing. 
Even if the game is difficult they don't mind the difficulty at all; they 
continue joyfully. In the same way, if we take joy in practice, then no 
matter what difficulty we encounter it won't seem hard at all. 
Enthusiasm is thus another factor in diligence. 
The next one is the courage that comes from abandonment. 
Abandoning means not holding onto a particular practice we have be­
come quite good at, thinking that "This is sufficient simply because I 
have trained in it." For example we may feel very competent in 
shamatha practice because we have attained some proficiency in it. We 
might think "Maybe it's not necessary to expand into vipashyana. Why 
enter a new area that I am not familiar with? Maybe I'd better hold 
onto what I know and do well in." That is clinging, the opposite of 
abandonment. When we have a brave escort on the path, we have the 
courage to proceed further. Courageous abandonment thus helps us to 
be more diligent. 
The next factor for diligence is determination, making up our minds 
that 'What I'm involved in is the main thing, it is significant, I will 
focus on it." A determined frame of mind helps us to persevere and be 
diligent. 
The last factor, the sixth, is the strength of taking charge. We do 
not have to feel weakened or victimized by samsaric tendencies -this is 
our own choice. We shouldn't feel lazy and excuse ourselves by 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
thinking, "I'm sorry, I can't help it; it is not within my power to do 
much." We should instead take charge of our lives, deciding what to 
focus our attention on. Whether we will allow ourselves to be lazy or 
not is basically in our own hands. The strength of taking charge allows 
us to carry on with practice, to persevere and be diligent. 
When Naropa describes being diligent in the sense of "the conti­
nuous flow of a great river," it means not to lose presence of mind in 
any given moment. Always try to be alert and attentive, and frequently 
remind yourself to practice. It doesn't matter what position we have in 
life. Simply continuing the practice, being mindful and diligent, we can 
carry on like a river. 
'Whatever you do is meaningful," means that by acting in this way, 
our lives will have some consequence, some meaning. Keeping the con­
tinuous awareness of the nature of mind is itself what is called the 
eternal awakened state -eternal in the sense of being uninterrupted. 
'Awakened state' here means the real buddha. In the continuity of that 
awakened state there is no room for ignorance. There is no opportunity 
for any samsaric state to occur with all its accompanying suffering and 
misery. This is why it is called "the great bliss, leaving no room for 
samsara." 
Maybe some doubts are surfacing at this point. For example, you 
might think that understanding all outer things to be empty and devoid 
of concrete nature, as well as understanding the perceiver to be free of 
any substantial identity, could exclude the possibility of compassion. 
One might worry that through realizing emptiness one might become 
uncompassionate, heartless and cruel. That's not the case at all. For the 
individual, all suffering vanishes when the nature of mind is realized. 
The absence of personal suffering is in itself great bliss. Unfortunately 
it is not the same for others, who still experience suffering, even though 
they have the same essential enlightened nature. The Third Karmapa 
said that the essence of all beings is continuously the awakened state, 
just as what the practitioner realizes. Even though their nature is the 
awakened state, it doesn't help much if they are unaware or ignorant of 
SoNGS oF NAROPA 
it. In most situations sentient beings are unable to realize how the 
nature of their mind is. Seeing that, one cannot help but feel com­
passiOn. 
Another reason we do not become uncompassionate from practicing 
Mahamudra is that we are practicing within the framework of the 
bodhisattva vow. Even at the beginning stage when compassion does 
not spontaneously arise out of realization, we can still generate com­
passion through developing bodhichitta. All sentient beings possess the 
enlightened essence, and are therefore able to be enlightened. They are 
able to train in the state of samadhi and fully realize it. However, 
certain circumstances must be complete for them to understand how to 
train. Maybe they don't have even the interest or the merit to learn how 
to practice. If that is the case, realization will be very difficult. Thinking 
of this again, even in a conceptual way, we can feel compassion. Thus, 
from both the relative and the ultimate points of view, we can be 
compassionate while practicing Mahamudra. 
On the other hand, we might fear that compassion prevents realiza­
tion, feeling that being compassionate could prove to be a stumbling 
block for understanding emptiness. It is not like that either. Whether 
we practice Mahamudra or Dzogchen, in the moment of being 
compassionate, we can look into what it is that feels compassion. 
Whether it is a natural compassion or a generated one, the moment we 
look, we see that there is no entity to find. As the Third Karmapa 
Rangjung Dorje said: "In the moment oflove, the empty essence dawns 
nakedly." When feeling love and compassion for others, that which 
feels compassion is not some kind of hard, solid lump or blob. It is 
totally insubstantial, as in the case of any other emotional or conceptual 
state. By looking towards that which feels compassion, we can realize 
this emptiness in actuality. In this way, emptiness and compassion are 
indivisible. By progressing in our practice of the natural state and 
developing further compassion, we accomplish the benefit of ourselves 
by cultivating insight into emptiness. Through cultivating great com-
179 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
passion, we will be able to undertake the immense task of accom­
plishing the benefit of others. 
If you have any questions, please ask. 
Student: When there is perception, is it the self-knowing quality of 
mind that apprehends? Is it the same principle for both conceptual and 
non-conceptual experiences? 
Rinpoche: The word self-knowing, rang-rig in Tibetan, is defined as 
'one's mind not being hidden from oneself. In other words, you can say 
your personal cognition is not hidden from yourself; but is 'self-known'. 
When you see something, you don't have to be told that you see it -
you know that you see. You don't have to wonder, "Am I really seeing 
the pillar or not?," or wait for someone else to tell you, "Now you are 
seeing a pillar." That is the self-knowing quality. Whether the 
experience is conceptual or non-conceptual doesn't make any 
difference; it's still self-knowing, or as you might say in English, 'auto­
knowing.' 
Student: Concerning doubt, isn't it healthy to doubt when making up 
our minds in problematic situations? Isn't it possible that sometimes in 
meditation one can resolve problems? 
Rinpoche: It depends on the circumstances you're in. If people are 
waiting for you to apply your attention to a certain problem, you should 
make up your mind, and solve it in an intelligent way. You should be 
able to discriminate between what is and is not beneficial, to weigh the 
possibilities and decide on what is best. Eliminate all doubt, then 
announce your decision. That's the course to take. In a different 
situation, nobody is waiting for you to make up your mind. You're 
simply sitting on your meditation cushion and your mind keeps 
churning: "Maybe I should do this. Maybe I should do that. I wonder. 
I'm not really sure.'' Such a situation, when no imminent decision 
needs to be taken, yet doubt keeps developing, creates an obstacle for 
meditation practice. At that point, it's much better to look into who is 
x8o 
SoNGS OF NAROPA 
it that doubts. Dissolve the doubt by recognizing its empty essence and 
relax into the calm, quiet state. 
Student: If I am unable to experience emptiness and compassion in an 
indivisible and united way, should I alternate between the two? 
Rinpoche: It is important to know from the beginning that emptiness 
and compassion neither alternate nor obstruct one another. It's not like 
we can experience one without the other. If we maintain that it's only 
necessary to focus on emptiness, that compassion doesn't matter; we 
will go in a wrong direction. If we think that the most important thing 
is to be loving and kind, and that understanding emptiness is not 
important; we will likewise go in a wrong direction. Even if at present 
you are not able to experience emptiness and compassion in an 
indivisible way, it doesn't matter that much. Just continue the practice. 
Sometimes recognize emptiness, and sometimes cultivate compassion. 
As we train repeatedly we discover that within emptiness there is the 
possibility of having full compassion for all sentient beings. Likewise, 
being compassionate doesn't prevent insight into the empty nature of 
all phenomena. Gradually you will realize the state of original 
wakefulness in which emptiness and compassion are indivisible. 
Student: It seems that enlightenment is far away. How can we explain it 
in an understandable fashion to our children? 
Rinpoche: On one hand, we may believe that enlightenment is far away, 
that it takes a long time. It's true that if we don't practice, it is 
extremely far away. However, if we practice continuously and steadily, 
the state of enlightenment, the awakened state, will draw closer. The 
point is simply to practice as much as you can. I don't feel there is any 
particular special way to make understanding emptiness easier for 
children. It is more a matter of allowing them to decide to practice by 
themselves when they grow up. That is quite good. 
Student: I have a question from the text. I understand that it's a mistake 
to believe in eternalism or nihilism, but herein the text it says: "This is 
181 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
the eternal awakened state." How is that different from the misconcep­
tion of eternalism? 
Rinpoche: The view of eternalism is the idea that things last forever, 
and this belief obstructs the understanding that all composite things are 
impermanent. Falling into the extreme of permanence thus becomes a 
hindrance. The view of nihilism maintains that there is no consequence 
to one's actions; and that there is nothing after death. Using these 
definitions, the understanding of the awakened state doesn't fall into 
the extreme of eternalism. Simply because it's the original, primordial, 
basic state doesn't mean that it's eternalistic.+ 
r8z 
18 
WE HAVE NOW COME TO THE THIRD POINT about the Maha­
mudra of fruition, called "stating the nature of the Mahamudra 
of ultimate perfection," which means the ultimate result. 
All things are empty of their own identities. 
The concept fixed on emptiness has dissolved in itself. 
Free of concept, holding nothing in mind; 
Is, itself, the path of all buddhas. 
In the first line, 'all things' includes both entitles made out of 
physical substance that we perceive as well as the consciousness that 
cognizes and perceives. Both physical things and consciousness are 
devoid of individual identity. When we closely inspect any particular 
entity, we find every single one of them are composed of many parts. 
It's only in our minds that we apprehend things as being singular. 
Actually, they are a composite of many smaller sections. When we look 
at the smaller parts, we find they are also a composite, and so on and so 
on, down to the tiniest atom. When we examine the atom we find that 
even an atom, literally an indivisible particle, does not withstand our 
scrutiny -it doesn't hold up as being a single entity either. It is as 
insubstantial as a bubble. Therefore, as Naropa says, all things are 
empty of their own identities. 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
Secondly, consciousness is similarly empty of its own identity. 
There is no concrete substance to it. There are two ways that we can 
establish this. One is through direct experience, turning consciousness 
directly onto itself to look directly into what it is that experiences. In 
that moment, we do not find any concrete entity that experiences. We 
see it in actuality as being empty of any definite substance. 
The other way is through reasoning, which also allows us to find 
certainty about the emptiness of consciousness. Normally we think of 
'my mind' as a continuity that is sustained from the past into the 
present, and through the present into the future. We decide 
conceptually that 'my consciousness' is one singular entity. In fact, this 
is mistaken. Those instances of consciousness which occurred in the 
past are gone and have ceased. Future moments of consciousness have 
not yet occurred, so they cannot be said to be right now. The present 
moment of experience, no matter how short or subtle it might be, must 
have a beginning, a middle and an end. If the moment has any duration 
at all, it can be divided into parts that belong to the past, are present 
right now, and are connected to the future. However intelligently or 
minutely we search, we are at a loss to find a real continuous 'thing' that 
is the perceiving consciousness. In this way, through reasoning, we can 
conclude that consciousness is empty of its own identity. 
As a side remark, the word 'all things' in Tibetan is cho, in Sanskrit 
dharma with a small 'd'. The word dharma has many connotations. 
Sometimes dharma refers to that which needs to be applied in practice, 
while other times it means the teachings of the awakened ones. 
Dharma can also mean knowable entities, anything that can be known 
or experienced. That is the connotation here; the word 'dharma' refers 
to knowable entities like physical things and consciousness. 
The statement in the second line is that "conceptual mind fixed on 
emptiness has dissolved in itsel£" We can understand that all things are 
empty of their own identities. However, to rigidly hold onto the 
concept 'everything is empty' is definitely no good. As the great 
Mahasiddha Saraha said, "To believe that things are concrete is to be as 
SoNGS oF NAROPA 
stupid as an ox." Attaching concrete existence to that which doesn't 
have it is as foolish and ignorant as the perception of an ox. However, 
Saraha adds, "If one fixates on the idea of emptiness, that is even more 
deluded." 
The idea 'all things are empty or insubstantial' is dependent upon 
and negates the idea that things are concrete and substantial. Without 
the original premise, 'all things are substantial,' -which is untrue -
there couldn't be the opposite idea that they aren't. These two con­
cepts, substantial and insubstantial, are thus mutually dependent. The 
great bodhisattva Shantideva gave an example for this type of mutual 
dependency. A woman falls asleep and dreams that she had a child. first 
there is the idea that something is. Later in the same dream, the child 
dies. Based on the idea that there was a child, there idea arises that 
there isn't a child anymore. But remember, both are false -because no 
child was ever born! After all, it's a dream. In the same way, no child 
died either. There is no real birth, and no real death. This example 
shows us how, since all things do not really exist to begin with, it is 
equally deluded to hold onto the concept that "things are unreal" The 
concept of emptiness must be dissolved as well, but naturally. 
Through using reason and logic, we can settle with certainty that 
everything is empty of its own identities, both things as well as 
consciousness. In Mahamudra practice, we do not reason intellectually. 
Rather the training is simply to let consciousness look directly into 
itself and see that there is no concrete entity which perceives or which 
experiences. Mind is empty of any identity, any concrete essence. Not 
only is it empty -there is a natural quality of being conscious, awake. 
This lucidity is a cognizance which is always present throughout all 
states. Likewise, this conscious or cognizant quality is not made out of 
any concrete identity either. Through seeing this directly, any concept 
of emptiness vanishes. 
In Mahamudra training it is possible to go astray in three particular 
ways. The first of these three is called 'the basic straying from the 
nature of emptiness'. One thinks that the emptiness of the nature of all 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
things is an absence of what already is. This is a mistaken idea. 
Emptiness is not like the normal concept 'empty', which means 
'nothing'. An empty room means there are no things in the room. but 
emptiness does not imply that something has to be totally absent to be 
empty. Rather, it is that all things are already empty by nature. The 
true state of all things is inherently emptiness, and this emptiness is 
indivisible from dependent origination. One does not prevent the 
other. The emptiness of mind does not block off its cognizant quality. 
While perceiving, this cognizant quality is at the same time empty of 
any concrete substance. It's unconfined. By understanding in this way, 
we avoid slipping into 'the straying of emptiness as to the nature of 
things'. 
The next way of going astray is called 'basic straying into 
generelizing emptiness'. When this occurs, your attention moves into a 
thought or a disturbing emotion; and you remind yourself, "This 
thought is emptiness!" This method superimposes emptiness on top of 
the thought or the emotion, rather than directly seeing the emptiness 
that is naturally present. Of course it's not totally bad to remind 
ourselves of emptiness, but this way of impressing emptiness on top of 
thoughts and emotions prevents us from seeing emptiness in actuality. 
The third type is 'emptiness straying into the remedy.' In this case, 
when we get attached or angry, we think "I shouldn't be feeling angry 
or attached. The object of my desire or anger is emptiness, so I should 
give up this anger or attachment." Objects are certainly empty of any 
true existence, but using the idea of emptiness as a remedy is not a 
totally effective way to realize the natural state of emptiness. 
Rather than training in the three ways of going astray, we should, as 
Naropa says, allow ourselves to be "free of concept, holding nothing in 
mind.'' We should understand that there is no such 'thing' as an empti­
ness that can be held in mind as an object. Acknowledge this to be as it 
is, and do not hold anything in mind. Then there is nothing that needs 
to be pinpointed as being emptiness. As the text says, that "is, itself, the 
path of all buddhas." All buddhas of the past, any awakened ones in the 
186 
SoNGS OF NAROPA 
present, and any buddha appearing in the future will all traverse exacdy 
this same path of being free of concepts and holding nothing 
whatsoever in mind. 
As you know, Milarepa sang many songs, which were very pithy and 
extremely beneficial to those who listened and understood. Among 
these songs is one he sang for a woman called Paltabum. In the song 
she is referred to as Nyama Paltabum. The word nyama, maiden, has a 
special connotation of being a female lay practitioner. In those days, 
there were women who would practice a lot but still led the life of lay 
people. They took vows to do intensive practice on the 8th or the 15th 
or the 30th day of the Tibetan month, and in between they would carry 
on their normal work. Milarepa had many such disciples. Paltabum was 
very bright and devoted and she asked Milarepa many questions. One 
of the responses he gave her is in the form of a song that I would like 
to share with you now. 
Paltabum had asked Milarepa: "Who is your teacher? What 
teachings did you receive? Having received teachings, where did you 
practice? How did you practice? Having practiced, what kind of 
realization have you achieved? What disciples do you have?" Milarepa's 
reply combined an outer, inner and innermost level of meaning. He 
sang about what he himself practiced, how he practiced, where he 
practiced, how his state of realization was, and so on. 
Paltabum also asked questions about how she herself, being an ordi­
nary woman, could combine Dharma practice with her daily life. As 
she related, "In the daytime I have to work, at nighttime I sleep, in the 
morning and evening I need to cook. I am a servant to all these tasks 
that fill up my life. In spite of this, I still want to practice. How can I 
do this? Please give me some advice." 
In reply, Milarepa sang a song of four analogies and one meaning, 
five points. first he said: "Look at the mountain. The mountain is 
unshakable. Like that, train in being like a mountain, always steady and 
stable." Then he said: "Look at the sun and the moon. Though 
sometimes covered by clouds and haze, the sun and the moon in them-
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
selves never change; their brilliance doesn't increase or decrease, they're 
forever the same. Train yourself in being constant, without waxing and 
waning." The third analogy he gave was: "Look at the sky. Space is not 
made out of anything. Its nature is empty, and has neither center nor 
edge. Train yourself in being free from center and edge." Then he said: 
"Look at the great lake: Though its surface ripples, the body of water 
remains unwavering. Train yourself in being unwavering." finally he 
gave the fifth point, the meaning, singing, "Your mind is the most 
important. Simply settle into yourself and look into your mind. 
Without being carried away by thoughts about this and that, be totally 
steady and meditate. That is the heart essence of meditation." 
Paltabum connected her next questions with the analogies Milarepa 
had just given. She said: "I can at times train in being as stable as a 
mountain. However, on the mountain various plants, shrubs and trees 
grow. What should I do? I can at times practice in a way which is un­
changing like the brilliance of the sun and moon. But occasionally the 
sun and moon are eclipsed. When that happens, what should I do? I 
can at times train in being as steady and unchanging as the sky, but 
sometimes many clouds gather. At that time, what should I do? I can 
train in being as stable as the ocean, but sometimes great waves appear. 
At that time what should I do? In the same way, when I'm simply 
looking into mind, sometimes many thoughts come. At that time what 
should I do?" 
Milarepa's reply continued with these themes. He said: "When you 
practice in a way that is like a mountain, remember this; shrubs, trees 
and plants grow naturally on the mountain, sprouting, growing and 
perishing there. This arising, dwelling and ceasing of growth does not 
change the mountain in any way whatsoever. It is merely different 
expressions that don't affect the stability of the mountain at all. 
"Sometimes you are able to practice in a way that is unchanging, 
like the brilliance of the sun and moon. However, remember that the 
eclipsing of the sun and moon is not real and constant; it's a 
momentary event that does not any have co"ncrete substance in itsel£ It 
188 
SoNGS oF NAROPA 
vanishes. It's only the different expressions of the sun and moon, and 
does not affect their inherent nature, as they continue to shine 
naturally. 
"Sometimes you are able to practice in a way that is unchanging, 
like the sky. Remember this: when clouds gather, they do not change 
the sky itself, no matter how dense or dark they are. The many 
different types of weather are a varied display, but the sky remains 
beyond change. 
"Although you can practice like the ocean, remember this; when the 
surface is in turmoil with waves, there is no wave that exists apart from 
the ocean. It's the ocean itself that manifests different expressions. No 
wave has a separate identity from the ocean. 
"When different thoughts crowd your mind, remember that no 
thought has any existence separate from the empty cognizance of the 
mind nature. It is the empty cognizance itself that takes the form of a 
thought, and is like varying facial expressions or moods, without any 
separate identity." This is Milarepa's instruction in sustaining the 
nature of mind. 
The practice of the development stage involves visualizing many 
different details. first imagine the buddhafield, the environment, within 
which there is an immense celestial palace housing the deity. There 
could be either a single deity or a chief figure surrounded by a retinue 
of other deities. These deities wear all sorts of ornaments and rich attire 
and hold various attributes in their hands. In the center of the heart of 
the chief figure, visualize the awakened state of mind in the form of a 
seed syllable. This syllable can be HRIH or TAM or HUNG or any other. 
At the end of the development stage comes the completion stage, 
where everything held in mind gradually dissolves. first the buddhafield 
dissolves into the celestial palace, which dissolves into the deities. All 
the deities gradually and slowly dissolve into the seed syllable in the 
heart center. This seed syllable gradually dissolves into light. At the 
end there is no 'thing' held in mind as a focus. We allow ourselves to 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
remain like that, not developing anything. This is called 'the method of 
realizing emptiness through the completion stage'. 
This training in the completion stage after dissolving the visualiza­
tion into emptiness is a little different from the training in the emp­
tiness of Mahamudra, but the end result of realizing that all things are 
empty of any substantial identity is the same. Thus, as we train more 
and more, we will find that they are mutually supportive and there is no 
conflict between them at all.+ 
19 
S OME TEACHERS KEEP THESE Mahamudra instructions secret, and 
choose not to teach them openly or widely to just anyone. When 
they do teach Mahamudra it is only to people who have done a 
considerable amount of practice, so-called 'worthy recipients'. There 
are several reasons for doing so. When those who are truly ready to 
receive these teachings are told how to place their attention, how to 
settle their mind and train in Mahamudra, there is no problem. The 
problem comes when, instead of getting down to the heart of the 
matter, the practitioner spins a web of concepts to create an "under­
standing" of how to practice. By continuing that way, the person 
eventually finds that he or she is making little progress. He or she may 
lose faith or even turn against the teachings, saying, "Mahamudra 
practice is useless! Nothing comes out of it!" That is a serious problem. 
If we don't genuinely understand the practice, we should not pretend 
that we do, or give up, saying: ''This is too difficult to assimilate." 
Rather, we should put effort into achieving both correct understanding 
and practice. We shouldn't lose courage, but persevere. 
Here's another problem some people encounter. We may discover 
we are talented and easily comprehend the practice of Mahamudra. It 
seems to immediately fit "our way," and we find we can settle our 
minds into the state of Mahamudra almost effortlessly. When that 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
happens, we may start to think we are incredibly special. We may tell 
ourselves, "I don't need to do anything other than Mahamudra practice. 
To get involved in accepting good or rejecting evil is an inferior way of 
practice; it's unimportant. Creating merit is not anything I need to 
spend my time on." Such a proud attitude can cause a serious 
predicament. Just because we occasionally glimpse the awakened state, 
or even have a sustained experience of it, doesn't mean it will continue. 
There is no guarantee that the experience will deepen or that we will 
progress. What is essential is to not only have an experience, but to 
continuously practice in order to deepen and expand that experience. If 
we think that the point we have reached is sufficient, it's very difficult 
to progress further. Among the two factors -cause and conditions -
the cause is the experience of Mahamudra, but one of the conditions 
that helps it to develop is to pay close attention to the consequences of 
our actions. We need to accept good and reject evil deeds, to create 
merit, purifY the obscurations and gather the accumulations. When we 
do this, we can definitely progress in Mahamudra practice. 
To conclude, instructing and stating the dedication: 
I have given these concise words of heartfelt advice 
For the most fortunate ones. 
Through this may every single sentient being 
Be established in Mahamudra. 
The great pandita Naropa condensed the teachings on Mahamudra 
into concise words and g~ve them as heartfelt advice. These teachings 
are meant for the most fortunate ones, those who have the karmic 
destiny to enter the Buddhist teachings, and to have the interest, the 
opportunity, and the capability to apply the teachings. Many people in 
this world seem to have no inclination towards spiritual practice, and 
thus lack this fortune. Even among those people interested in Buddhist 
spiritual practice, it's not everyone who has the ability and opportunity 
to receive V ajrayana teachings. Among those who enter the gateway of 
Vajrayana, it's not everyone who can assimilate and trust in the practice 
SoNGS oF NAROPA 
of Mahamudra. Even though they may have the opportunity to receive 
the teachings, not everyone can actually apply themselves diligendy -
in other words, have the precious fortune. The teachings here are 
meant for those people who are the most fortunate ones. Not only have 
they pursued a spiritual path; they have entered Buddhism. They have 
met the Vajrayana and most especially are fortunate enough to receive 
Mahamudra teachings, trust them and apply themselves diligendy. It is 
for these people that Naropa has given this summary of profound 
guidance. 
The great pandita Naropa states "I have given these concise words 
of heartfelt advice." Naropa bestowed these teachings with great 
affection and love. Mahamudra instructions can be taught in a very 
detailed and precise way. In this song, all the aspects of the view, the 
practice and the stages are explained very succincdy. Teachings like 
these are very precious and beneficial when one is studying to attain 
certainty about the view. When it comes to training our mind in 
Mahamudra, too many details can encumber direct application. To 
touch base with the practice itself, sometimes it is more helpful to have 
everything condensed into short, concise words. That way we can 
remember, understand, and remind ourselves to utilize them from time 
to time. Naropa has given us a summary of Mahamudra structured as 
twelve verses -three each for view, meditation, conduct and fruition 
-plus an extra verse for the conclusion, making thirteen verses 
altogether. 
The teachings of the Buddha and the commentaries of the great 
panditas are very extensive; vast in their scope and their perspective. It 
requires a person of broad intelligence to be able to embrace all the 
meaning contained in the sutras. For this reason, a few of the great 
masters composed treatises that compressed the immense meaning into 
a few brief verses. Their efforts were specifically directed to benefit 
people of later eras, who lack the capacity or simply the time to 
assimilate the meaning of all the Buddha's words. In the sutras we 
occasionally find that certain vital points are not fully clarified, and are 
193 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
even concealed. In order to emphasize what has real importance and to 
fully bring to light that which was held back by the Buddha, panditas 
wrote treatises -shastras -that fully disclose the hidden meaning. In 
this song by Naropa, we have both. The term "heartfelt advice," means 
he openly revealed his innermost heart to the listener. You can say that 
he fully uncovered the hidden meaning, the vital points. The word 
concise implies that the vast meaning is brought together into a few 
key points. 
The first two lines express Naropa's knowledge, his capacity to 
create a text like this. The next two lines are about compassion. He 
wrote this out of great love and kindness for all sentient beings. The 
words he uses are: "Through this may every single sentient being be 
established in Mahamudra." The benefit of this teaching is not 
restricted to a certain caste of people, for those from a particular area of 
a country, or from only a few countries, or even for only human beings. 
It is meant for every single sentient being, without any exception. His 
aspiration is that the effect of this teaching may be of benefit to 
everyone. People are truly benefited by realizing Mahamudra, and all 
the manifold teachings that the awakened 
ones give out of skillful 
means do bring benefit to whoever practices them- there's no doubt 
about that. Among all the teachings given, the pithiest ones that have 
the deepest impact and are the simplest to apply are those of 
Mahamudra. 
"May every single sentient being be established in Mahamudra." 
When Naropa expresses this wish, it is out of compassion. By showing 
this, he shows us, his followers, how to behave as well. We should 
follow this example of kindness towards everyone without exception. In 
our lives, when we look at other beings we see that they suffer in 
various ways. Some are hungry, some are sick, some have mental 
problems, others physical ones. Very often people with an altruistic 
frame of mind feel saddened and frustrated by seeing the suffering in 
the world. Often they feel the need to do something to help others. 
Through our compassion we can alleviate suffering to some extent. In 
194 
SoNGS OF NAROPA 
the Buddhist teachings there is the famous wish: "May all beings be 
free of suffering and the causes of suffering." Not only is it important to 
alleviate the actual suffering that sentient beings feel; it is essential to 
work on removing the causes that bring about the experience of pain 
and misery. The teaching of Mahamudra is exactly what can remove 
the causes of suffering. 
Out of compassion, we should try our best to ensure that the 
teachings of the Awakened One, the Buddha, do not disappear and 
vanish. Please work to make the teachings accessible for others, which 
will ensure that the teachings do not disappear. This is particularly true 
for the teachings of Mahamudra. Spreading them all over the world 
makes the actual remedy against suffering and the causes of suffering 
available. This is a way to express compassion in a true manner. When 
doing this, it is important not to focus.on selfish or materialistic aims, 
but to act out of a true, kind heart. 
In general, compassion is a feeling that is overwhelming. You could 
call it a deep-felt sadness. It is often described by the great masters as 
the feeling a crippled mother has when she sees her only child being 
carried away by a river. She desperately wants to help save her child, 
but she cannot -she is powerless. That is how the tenderness of 
compassion in our heart is. It's not totally the same as ordinary 
frustration or feeling incapacitated or depressed, however, because 
within this compassion is the understanding that by practicing, one will 
be able to help others. One thinks, "Since I am a practitioner, the 
opportunity exists for the virtues I cultivate to be used for the benefit of 
others." It's not a completely hopeless situation either, as 'boundless joy' 
is combined within the compassion. It's a happy/sad feeling at the same 
time; kind ofbittersweet. 
This was given orally by the great pandita Naropa, to Marpa 
Chokyi Lodro at Pullahari. 
As I mentioned at the beginning of this book, Naropa was a great 
scholar in the first part of his life. He was entrusted with the position 
195 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
of guarding the northern gate of Nalanda Monastery during the time 
when the Buddhist teachings truly flourished. The gates to Nalanda 
functioned as an entry point, and the pandita in charge of each 
particular gate would sometimes meet with the people who entered. If 
people came out of sincere interest, the pandita would teach them how 
to begin Buddhist practice. If they were devoted and wanted further 
instruction, he would give them further instruction. If someone had 
doubts or uncertainty, he would clarify them. If someone came to 
object against Buddhism, to raise controversial points and dispute, the 
pandita's responsibility would be to defend the Buddhist point of view, 
to refute any wrong notions. 
Remember the story ofNaropa's meeting with Vajra Yogini at the 
northern gate? His encounter with her taught Naropa that he needed to 
be learned in meaning rather than words. Vajra Y ogini told him about 
the great mahasiddha Tilopa. Simply upon hearing the name Tilopa, 
Naropa experienced incredible devotion and trust, and the intense wish 
to meet Tilopa welled up inside him. So he set out to find Tilopa, 
whom he finally met with and followed. Naropa received the pithy 
instructions of Mahamudra which he practiced and realized. At some 
point, Tilopa gave him the prediction that "In the future your chief 
disciple will be a Tibetan by the name Marpa Chokyi Lodro. It is to 
him you should entrust your lineage." That is how we have this text, 
which was given orally by the great pandita Naropa to the Tibetan 
Marpa Chokyi Lodro at Naropa's hermitage at Pullahari. 
I would like to add that I am not someone who is accomplished in 
any significant way. I have neither attained the common nor the 
supreme siddhis. However, I have met extraordinary masters and re­
ceived these wonderful teachings, which I consider very precious. I feel 
that that you students must also value them, as many of you have come 
from far-away places and have taken quite a bit of trouble to reach 
Nepal. I am extremely happy for this opportunity to teach Mahamudra 
to all of you who attended this seminar. It seemed to me that you 
listened well throughout the teachings, and I am also pleased at how 
SoNGS OF NAROPA 
you practiced during this time. The most important aspect about 
Mahamudra teachings is not simply to have heard or received them. 
The real importance lies in applying them -in practicing and training 
in them. When app~d, these teachings will be of immense benefit, not 
only for oneself, but also for others. When we have trained further and 
become stable in the practice of Mahamudra, we can undertake the task 
of helping others to similarly understand. In this sense, the benefit is 
not limited to ourselves. Since the basis for this lies in practicing, please 
practice these teachings.+ 
I97 

Acknowledgements 
0 NCE AGAIN WE HAVE THE OPPORTUNITY to thank our gracious, 
skilled Dharma friends. Without their generous help this book 
could not have come into existence. We are particularly indebted to the 
transcribers, Ian Saude and Marilyn Jones; to Kerry Moran for her meticu­
lous editing, to Michael Tweed for editing the initial versions of Naropa's 
songs, and to the proofreaders Gloria Jones and Shirley Blair. May this 
effort lengthen the life and activities of Thrangu Rinpoche, hasten the 
swift rebirth of Kyabje Tulku Urgyen Rinpoche and help immeasurable 
beings reach fruition on the path ofMahamudra.+ 
-Erik and Marcia Schmidt 
199 



