(OSI IN OR ID ads A SIS) as 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
 
OCEAN OF DHARMA SERIES 
Teachings 
ON THE PRACTICE OF 
MEDITATION 
Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche
Acknowledgements 
We would like to thank The Very Venerable Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche 
for giving these teachings and permission to publish them, 
Lama Yeshe Gyamtso for translating them and to 
Lama Tashi Namgyal and the staff of Shenpen Osel 
who transcribed, edited, and first published these teachings. 
Copyright © 2001 Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche 
& Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal Publications. 
ISBN Number: 1-877294-04-7 
All rights reserved. No part of this book, either text or art, 
may be reproduced in any form, electronic or otherwise, 
without written permission from Thrangu Rinpoche 
or Shenpen Osel. 
Reproduced with permission by 
Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal Publications: 
PO Box 6259 Wellesley Street, 
Auckland, New Zealand 
email: inquiries@greatliberation.org 
website: www.greatliberation.org 
Note 
We have italicized the technical words the first time that they 
appear to alert the reader that their definition can be found in the 
Glossary of Terms. To assist the practitioner the Tibetan words are given 
as they are pronounced, not spelled in Tibetan. We use B.C.E. 
(Before Current Era) for B. C. and C.E. (Current Era) for A. D.
Contents 
ff Biography of Thrangu Rinpoche-——ix 
Foreword. L 
Mahamudra Lineage Prayer   
  x1 
X11   
  
  
  
  Introduction to Meditation——1 
Generating Loving Kindness & Compassion——9 
Correct Motivation 17 
Posture 23 
Mental Technique——29 
‘Transforming Consciousness into Wisdom 33   
  
  
  
  The Tantric Path & Mahamudra. 49 
Notes——63 
Glossary of Terms——65 
Index 85 
Meditation Centre Information——90 
  Long Life Prayer for Thrangu Rinpoche——9| 
vii
  
  “Enlightenment” 
Calligraphi ny by 
Thrangu Rinpoche 
   
Biography of Thrangu Rinpoche 
ff he lineage of the Thrangu Rinpoche incarnations began in the fifteenth 
century when the Seventh Karmapa, Chodrak Gyatso visited the 
region of of Thrangu in Tibet. At this time His Holiness Karmapa 
established Thrangu Monastery and enthroned Sherap Gyaltsen as the 
first Thrangu Rinpoche, recognizing him as the re-established 
emanation of Shuwu Palgyi Senge, one of the twenty-five great siddha 
disciples of Guru Padmasambhava. 
Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche is the ninth incarnation of this 
lineage and was born in Kham, Tibet in 1933. When he was four, H.H. 
the Sixteenth Gyalwa Karmapa and Palpung Situ Rinpoche recognized 
him as the incarnation of Thrangu Tulku by prophesying the names of 
his parents and the place of his birth. 
He entered Thrangu monastery and from the ages of seven to 
sixteen he studied reading, writing, grammar, poetry, and astrology, 
memorised ritual texts, and completed two preliminary retreats. At sixteen 
under the direction of Khenpo Lodro Rabsel he began the study of the 
three vehicles of Buddhism while staying in retreat. 
At twenty-three he received full ordination from the Karmapa. 
When he was twenty-seven Rinpoche left Tibet for India at the time 
of the Communist invasion. He was called to Rumtek, Sikkim, where 
the Karmapa had his seat in exile. At thirty-five he took the geshe 
examination before 1500 monks at Buxador monastic refugee camp 
in Bengal, and was awarded the degree of Geshe Lharampa. On his 
return to Rumtek he was named Abbot of Rumtek monastery and 
the Nalanda Institute for Higher Buddhist studies at Rumtek. He 
has been the personal teacher of the four principal Karma Kagyu 
ix
Teachings on the Practice of Meditation 
tulkus: Shamar Rinpoche, Situ Rinpoche, Jamgon Kongtrul Rinpoche 
and Gyaltsab Rinpoche. 
Thrangu Rinpoche has travelled extensively throughout Europe, 
the Far East and the USA. He is the abbot of Gampo Abbey, Nova 
Scotia, and of Thrangu House, Oxford, in the UK. In 1984 he spent 
several months in Tibet where he ordained over 100 monks and nuns 
and visited several monasteries. He has also founded Thrangu Tashi 
Choling monastery in Boudhnath; a retreat centre and college at Namo 
Buddha east of the Katmandu Valley, and has established a school in 
Boudhnath for the general education of lay children and young monks. 
He also built Tara Abbey in Katmandu. In October of 1999 he 
consecrated the college at Sarnath which will accept students from the 
different traditions of Buddhism and will be open to western students 
as well. 
Thrangu Rinpoche, a recognised master of Mahamudra 
meditation has given teachings in over 25 countries and is especially 
known for taking complex teachings and making them accessible to 
western students. 
More recently, because of his vast knowledge of the Dharma, he 
was appointed by His Holiness the Dalai Lama to be the personal tutor 
for the recently escaped Seventeenth Karmapa Urgyen Trinley Dorje. 
 
€ SEE. 
i Ven. Lama Karma Shedrup Chogyi Senge Kartung 
Foreword 
The most popular and requested subject from students it seems is 
meditation, which I find very pleasing as this is the foundation of 
Buddhist practice. However there are many forms of meditation 
within the Buddhist tradition, which is quite different in approach 
and objective from that of other traditions. 
Yet within the many methods, the Buddhist view is quite simple 
and direct in emphasizing the importance of developing an 
understanding and relationship with one’s own mind and being, 
through the process of meditation. For whether we are happy or 
unhappy, and whether what we do is beneficial or harmful depends 
on our mind. 
Therefore it brings me great joy to present this teaching on the 
practice of meditation by The Very Venerable Khenchen 
Thrangu Rinpoche in which he covers and presents the various 
aspects and practices of meditation. 
Thrangu Rinpoche is one of the most highly realised and respected 
masters of meditation within the Kagyu Lineage. His wisdom and 
compassion are immeasurable and his ability to present the 
xi
xii Teachings on the Practice of Meditation 
Buddha’s teachings in an easily understandable and concise 
manner make his teachings quite remarkable. 
Whilst it is necessary for students to obtain specific meditation 
instructions directly from a teacher it is my wish that through 
this teaching one enters the correct path that leads to the ultimate 
happiness for all beings. 
May this merit cause the life and teachings of the great masters to 
flourish and remain for many eons benefiting limitless sentient 
beings. 
Karma Choeling Buddhist Monastery 
66 Bodhisattva Road 
RD 1 Kaukapakapa 
New Zealand
The Mahamudra Lineage Prayer 
ff, Great Vajradhara, Tilopa, Naropa, 
Marpa, Milarepa, Lord of Dharma Gampopa 
Knower of the Three Times, omniscient Karmapa, 
Holders of the four greater and eight lesser lineages, 
Drigung, Taglung, Tsalpa, these three glorious Drukpa 
and others 
Masters of the profound path of Mahamudra, 
Unequalled protectors of beings, the Dakpo Kagyu 
I supplicate you, the Kagyu gurus. I hold your lineage. 
Grant your blessing that I may follow your example. 
Detachment is the foot of meditation, as is taught 
To this meditator who is not attached to food and wealth 
Who cuts the ties to this life, grant your blessing 
That I have no desire for honor and gain. 
Devotion is the head of meditation, as is taught 
The guru opens the gate to the treasury of oral instruction. 
To the meditator who continually supplicates you 
Grant your blessing that genuine devotion is born within. 
Non-distraction is the foot of meditation, as is taught. 
Whatever arises, is fresh, the nature of realization. 
To the meditator who rests simply in naturalness, 
Grant your blessing that my meditation is free from 
conceptualization 
xiii
xiv Teachings on the Practice of Meditation 
The essence of thought is dharmakaya, as is taught 
Nothing whatsoever, it arises as everything. 
To the meditator for whom all arises in unceasing play. 
Grant your blessing that I realize samsara and nirvana as 
inseparable. 
Through all my births, may I never be separated 
from the perfect guru 
And always enjoy the splendor of Dharma. 
Perfecting the qualities of the paths and stages, 
May I swiftly attain the sate of Vajradhara. 
 
Teachings 
ON THE PRACTICE OF 
MEDITATION 
Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche 
In the spread of Buddhism beyond Asia, the Kagyu lineage was 
in the forefront of sending lamas to the West. Of these lamas, 
the three great progenitors of the dharma in the West were His 
Holiness the Gyalwa Karmapa, His Eminence Kalu Rinpoche 
and the Vidyadhara Chogyam Trungpa Rinpoche. 
It was very unfortunate that in the 1980s we lost all of these 
great beings, but in the aftermath, there were a number of 
remarkable lamas in the lineage who stepped forward to fill 
their places and to bring great benefit to sentient beings. 
In the forefront was 
The Very Venerable Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche. 
Rinpoche has been very generous and kind to Western students, 
teaching the dharma extensively in retreats and seminars 
throughout the world. 
Rinpoche taught in Seattle for the first time in May 1996. 
This transcript is from those teachings.
  
                  
        fC JERK            
  
Buddha Amitabha in the seven point meditation posture  
Introduction to Meditation 
ff feu like to begin by expressing my appreciation of your 
sincere interestand wish to practice genuine dharma in general, 
and meditation and Vajrayana dharma in particular. This is all delightful 
to me. 
Pursuing this practice of meditation and the study of Vajrayana 
is extremely beneficial and useful, because in general, all of the goodness 
of the human life and all of the ability within the context of the human 
life to actually benefit others and affect others in a positive way comes 
from a cultivation of dharma in general and in particular from the practice 
of meditation. 
Next, in accordance with the custom of our tradition, the Karma 
Kagyu, 1 would like to chant the supplication to the teachers of my 
lineage (page xiii). Now, the particular lineage supplication which we 
use is used in all the Tibetan and overseas practice centres of our tradition, 
and in fact, it’s used by individual practitioners as well. The reason is 
that this particular liturgy was composed by Penkar Jampal Zangpo, 
who was a disciple of the Sixth Gyalwa Karmapa, Tongwa Donden, and 
the root guru of the Seventh Gyalwa Karmapa, Chotrag Gyamtso. Penkar 
Jampal Zangpo lived for eighteen years on an island of which he was the 
only inhabitant. He lived in a cave on that island and the island is in the 
middle of a lake in the north of Tibet called Sky Lake or Namtso. For 
the eighteen years of his sojourn there, he devoted himself entirely to 
meditating upon Mahamudra, of which he generated a decisive 
realisation. At the end of these eighteen years of retreat, he composed 
this lineage supplication, and therefore we regard it as embodying the 
result of all of his experience and we consider it to have great blessing. 
1
Teachings on the Practice of Meditation 
So now please recite it with a recollection of its significance and with 
confidence. Now please generate the pure motivation of bodhichitta, 
which is the thought that you will receive these teachings in order to be 
able to properly practice dharma in order to be of benefit to all beings 
who fill space. 
The essence of the buddhadharma, the teachings of the Buddha, 
is practice. When we say practice, we mean the practice of meditation, 
which can consist of either the meditation known as tranquillity or that 
known as insight. But in either case, it must be implemented in actual 
practice. The reason we practice meditation is to attain happiness. This 
means states of happiness in both the short term and the long term. 
With regard to short-term happiness, when we speak of happiness we 
usually mean either or both of two things, one of which is physical 
pleasure and the other mental pleasure. But if you look at either of these 
pleasant experiences, the root of either one has to be a mind that is at 
peace, a mind that is free of suffering. Because as long as your mind is 
unhappy and without any kind of tranquillity or peace, then no matter 
how much physical pleasure you experience, it will not take the form of 
happiness per se. On the other hand, even if you lack the utmost ideal 
physical circumstances of wealth and so on, if your mind is at peace you 
will be happy anyway. 
We practice meditation therefore in part in order to obtain the 
short-term benefit of a state of mental happiness and peace. Now the 
reason why meditation helps with this is that normally we have a great 
deal of thought, or many different kinds of thoughts running through 
our minds. Some of these thoughts are pleasant, even delightful. Some 
of them however, are unpleasant, agitating and worrisome. Now, if you 
examine the thoughts that are present in your mind from time to time 
you will see that the pleasant thoughts are comparatively few, and the 
unpleasant thoughts are many— which means that as long as your mind 
is ruled or controlled by the thoughts that pass through it, you will be 
quite unhappy. In order to gain control over this process we therefore 
begin with the meditation practice of tranquillity, which produces a 
basic state of contentment and peace within the mind of the practitioner.
Introduction to Meditation 
An example of this is the great Tibetan yogi Jetsun Milarepa, 
who lived in conditions of the utmost austerity. He lived in utter 
solitude, in caves and isolated mountains. His clothes were very poor; 
he had no nice clothes. His food was neither rich nor tasty. In fact, for 
a number of years he lived on nettle soup alone, as a result of which he 
became physically very thin, almost emaciated. Now if you consider 
his external circumstances alone, the isolation and poverty in which 
he lived, you would think he must have been miserable. Yet as we can 
tell from the many songs he composed, because his mind was 
fundamentally at peace, his experience was one of constant unfolding 
delight. His songs are songs that express the utmost state of delight or 
rapture. He saw every place he went to, no matter how isolated and 
austere an environment it was, as beautiful, and he experienced his 
life of utmost austerity as extremely pleasant. 
In fact the short-term benefits of meditation are more than merely 
peace of mind, because our physical health as well depends to a great 
extent upon our state of mind. Therefore, if you cultivate this state of 
mental contentment and peace, then you will tend not to become ill, 
and you will as well tend to heal easily if and when you do become ill. 
The reason for this is that one of the primary conditions which brings 
about states of illness is mental agitation, which produces a corresponding 
agitation or disturbance of the channels and energies (Skt. prana) within 
your body. These generate new sicknesses, ones you have not yet 
experienced and also prevent the healing of old sicknesses. This agitation 
of the channels and winds or energies also obstructs the benefits which 
could be derived from medical treatment. If you practice meditation, 
then as your mind settles down, the channels and the energies moving 
through the channels return to their rightful functioning, as a result of 
which you tend not to become ill and you are able to heal any illnesses 
you already have. We can see an illustration of this also in the life of 
Jetsun Milarepa, who engaged in the utmost austerities with regard to 
where he lived, the clothes he wore, the food he ate and so on throughout 
the early part of his life. Yet this did not harm his health, because he 
managed to have a very long life and was extremely vigorous and youthful
Teachings on the Practice of Meditation 
to the end of his life. This indicates the fact that through the proper 
practice of meditation, the mental peace and contentment that is generated 
calms down or corrects the functioning of the channels and energies, 
allowing for the healing of sickness and the prevention of sickness. 
The ultimate or long-term benefit of the practice of meditating 
is becoming free of all suffering, which means no longer having to 
experience the sufferings of birth, aging, sickness and death. Now this 
attainment of freedom is called, in the common language of all 
Buddhist traditions, buddhahood, and in the particular terminology 
of the Vajrayana, the supreme attainment, or supreme siddhi. In any 
case, the root or basic cause of this attainment is the practice of 
meditation. The reason for this is, again, that generally we have a lot 
of thoughts running through our minds, some of which are beneficial 
—thoughts of love, compassion, rejoicing in the happiness of others 
and so on—and many of which are negative—thoughts of attachment, 
aversion, jealousy, competitiveness and so on. Now there are 
comparatively few of the former type of thoughts and comparatively 
many of the latter type of thoughts because we have such strong habits 
that have been accumulating within us over a period of time without 
beginning. It’s only by removing these habits of negativity that we can 
free ourselves from suffering. 
You cannot simply remove these mental affliction, or kleshas, by 
saying to yourself, “I will not generate any more mental affliction,” 
because you do not have the necessary freedom of mind or control over 
the kleshas to do so. In order to relinquish these, you need to actually 
attain this freedom, which begins, according to the common path, with 
the cultivation of tranquillity (Tib. shinay, Skt. shamatha). Now when 
you begin to meditate, when you begin to practice the basic meditation 
of tranquillity meditation, you may find that your mind won't stay still 
for a moment. But this is not permanent. This will change as you practice 
and you will eventually be able to place your mind at rest at will, at 
which point you have successfully alleviated the manifest disturbance of 
these mental afflictions or kleshas. On the basis of that then you can 
apply the second technique which is called insight (Tib. /haktong, Skt.
Introduction to Meditation 
vipashyana)—which consists of learning to recognize and directly 
experience the nature of your own mind. This nature is referred to as 
emptiness. When you recognize this nature and rest in it, then all of the 
kleshas, all of the mental afflictions that arise, dissolve into this emptiness 
and are no longer afflictions. Therefore the freedom or result, which is 
called buddhahood, depends upon the eradication of these mental 
afflictions, and that depends upon the practice of meditation. 
The practice of tranquillity and insight is the general path which 
is common to both the paths of sutra and tantra. In the specific context 
which is particular to the Vajrayana, the main techniques are called 
the generation stage and the completion stage. These two techniques are 
extremely powerful and effective. 
Generation stage refers to the visualization of, for example, the 
form of a lineage guru, the form of a deity or yidam, or the form of a 
dharma protector (Skt. dharmapala). Now, initially when first 
encountering this technique it’s not uncommon for beginners to think, 
what is the point of this? Well, the point of this is that we support and 
confirm our ignorance and suffering and our kleshas through the constant 
generation of impure projections or impure appearances, which make 
up our experience of samsara. In order to transcend this process we need 
to transcend these impure projections together with the suffering that 
they bring about. A very effective way to do this is to replace these 
gradually, replace these projections of impurity with pure projections 
based on the iconography of the yidam, the dharmapala and so on. By 
starting to experience the world as the mandala of the deity and all 
beings as the presence of the deity, then you gradually train yourself to 
let go of mental afflictions, let go of impure projections and you create 
the environment for the natural manifestation of your own innate wisdom. 
Now all of this occurs gradually through this practice of the 
generation stage. The actual deities who are used can vary in appearance. 
Some of them are peaceful and some of them are wrathful. In general, 
the iconography of the wrathful deities points out the innate power of 
wisdom and that of the peaceful deities the qualities of loving-kindness 
and compassion. Also there are male deities and female deities. The
Teachings on the Practice of Meditation 
male deities embody the method or compassion and the female deities 
embody intelligence or wisdom. 
For these reasons, it’s appropriate to perform these practices of 
meditation upon deities. Because these practices are so prevalent in our 
tradition, if you go into a Vajrayana practice place or temple, you will 
probably see lots of images of deities—peaceful deities, wrathful deities 
and extraordinarily wrathful deities. Also you'll see lots of shrines with 
some very eccentric offerings on them. Initially, if you're not used to all 
this, you might think, “What is all this?” You might feel, “Well, the 
basic practices of tranquillity and insight make a lot of sense and are 
very interesting; and all these deities, all these rituals, and all these 
eccentric musical instruments are really not very interesting at all.” 
However each and every aspect of the iconography, and each and every 
implement you find in a shrine room is there for a very specific reason. 
The reason in general is that we need to train ourselves to replace our 
projections of impurity or negativity with a projection or experience of 
purity and you can’t simply fake this, you can’t simply talk yourself into 
this, because you're trying to replace something that is deeper than a 
concept. It’s more like a feeling. So therefore, in the technique by which 
you replace it, a great deal of feeling or experience of the energy of 
purity has to be actually generated, and in order to generate that we use 
physical representations of offerings, we use musical instruments in order 
to inspire the feeling of purity and so on. In short, all of these implements 
are useful in actually generating the experience of purity. 
That is the first of the two techniques of Vajrayana practice, the 
generation stage. The second technique is called the completion stage, 
and it consists of a variety of related techniques of which perhaps the 
most important and the best known are Mahamudra and Dzogchen or 
“the great perfection.” Now sometimes it seems to be presented that 
Dzogchen is more important, and at other times it seems to be presented 
that Mahamudra is more important, and as a result people become a 
little bit confused about this and are unsure which tradition or which 
practice they should pursue. Ultimately the practices in essence and in 
their result are the same. In fact, each of them has a variety of techniques
Introduction to Meditation 
within it. For example, within Mahamudra practice alone there are many 
methods which can be used, such as chandali! and so forth, and within 
the practice of Dzogchen alone there are as well many methods, such as 
the cultivation of primordial purity, spontaneous presence and so on. 
But ultimately Mahamudra practice is always presented as guidance on, 
or an introduction to your mind, and Dzogchen practice is always 
presented as a guidance on or introduction to your mind. Which means 
that the root of these is no different and the practice of either Mahamudra 
or Dzogchen will generate a great benefit. Further, we find in “The 
Aspiration of Mahamudra” by the third Gyalwa Karmapa, Lord 
Rangjung Dorje, the following stanza: 
It does not exist, and has not been seen, even by the Victors. 
It is not non-existent, it is the basis of all Samsara and 
Nirvana. 
This is not contradictory, but is the great Middle Way. 
May I come to see the nature which is beyond elaboration. 
That is from the Mahamudra tradition. Then, in The Aspiration 
for the Realization of the Nature of the Great Perfection by the omniscient 
Jigme Lingpa, an aspiration liturgy from the Dzogchen tradition, we 
find the following stanza: 
It does not exist, it has not been seen, even by the Victor. 
It is not non-existent, it is the basis of all Samsara and Nirvana. 
It is non-contradictory, it is the great Middle Way. 
May I come to recognize dzogpa chenpo, the nature of the 
ground. 
In other words, these two traditions are concerned entirely with 
the recognition of the same nature. 
So both short-term and ultimate happiness depend on the 
cultivation of meditation, which from the common point of view of the 
sutras [the point of view held in common by all traditions of Buddhism]
Teachings on the Practice of Meditation 
is tranquillity and insight, and from the uncommon point of view of 
the Vajrayana is the generation and completion stages. 
 
Generating 
Loving Kindness & Compassion 
ff. Moin depends in part upon the generation of loving- 
kindness and compassion. This is true of any meditation, 
but it is especially true of Vajrayana meditation. The reason is that the 
specific Vajrayana practices—the visualization of deities or meditation 
upon Mahamudra and so on—depend upon the presence of a pure 
motivation on the part of the practitioner from the very start. If this 
pure motivation or genuine motivation is not present—and since we're 
ordinary people, it’s quite possible that it might not be present—not 
much benefit will really occur. For that reason, Vajrayana practitioners 
always try to train their motivation and try to develop the motivation 
that’s known as the awakened mind, or bodhichitta. 
Now as an indication of this, if you look at the liturgies used in 
Vajrayana practice you'll see that the long and extensive forms of 
Vajrayana liturgies always begin with a clarification of, or meditation 
upon bodhichitta, and that even the short and shortest liturgies always 
begin with a meditation upon bodhichitta, loving-kindness and 
compassion, the point of this being that this type of motivation is 
necessary for all meditation, but especially for Vajrayana practice. 
The only real meaning that we can give to our being born on this 
planet—and in particular being born as human beings on this planet— 
and the only really meaningful result that we can show for our lives is to 
have helped the world: to have helped our friends, to have helped all the 
beings on this planet as much as we can. If we devote our lives or any 
significant part of our lives to destroying others and harming others,
Teachings on the Practice of Meditation 
then to the extent that we actually do so, our lives have been meaningless. 
So if you understand that the only real point of a human life is to help 
others, to benefit others, to improve the world, then you must understand 
that the basis of not harming others but benefiting others, is having the 
intention not to harm others and the intention to benefit others. 
Now, the main cause of having such a stable intention or stable 
motivation is the actual cultivation of love and compassion for others. 
Which means, when you find yourself full of spite and viciousness— 
and it is not abnormal to be so—then you have to recognize it and be 
aware of it as what it is, and let go of it. Then, even though you may be 
free of spite or viciousness and you may have the wish to improve things, 
you may be thinking only of yourself; you may be thinking only of 
helping or benefiting yourself. When that’s the case, then you have to 
recollect that the root of that type of mentality, which is quite petty and 
limited and tight, is desiring victory for yourself, even at the expense of 
the suffering and loss experienced by others. In that case you have to 
gradually expand your sympathy for others, and therefore this cultivation 
of bodhichitta or altruism in general as a motivation is an essential way 
of making your life meaningful. 
The importance of love and compassion is not an idea that is 
particular to Buddhism. Everyone throughout the world talks about 
the importance of love and compassion. There’s no one who says love 
and compassion are bad and we should try and get rid of them. However 
there is an uncommon element in the method or approach which is 
taken to these by Buddhism. In general, when we think of compassion, 
we think of a natural or spontaneous sympathy or empathy, which we 
experience when we perceive the suffering of someone else. We generally 
think of compassion as being a state of pain, of sadness, because you see 
the suffering of someone else and you see what’s causing that suffering 
and you know you can’t do anything to remove the cause of that suffering 
and therefore the suffering itself. So whereas before you generated 
compassion, one person was miserable, after you generate compassion, 
two people are miserable. This actually happens. 
10
Generating Loving Kindness & Compassion 
However, the approach that the Buddhist tradition takes to 
compassion is a little different, because it’s founded on the recognition 
that, whether or not you can benefit that being or that person in their 
immediate situation and circumstances, you can generate the basis for 
their ultimate benefit. The confidence in that removes the frustration 
or the misery which otherwise somehow afflicts ordinary compassion. 
So when compassion is cultivated in that way, it is experienced as 
delightful rather than miserable. 
The way that we cultivate compassion is called immeasurable 
compassion. In fact to be precise, there are four aspects of what we 
would in general call compassion, that are called, therefore, the four 
immeasurables. Now normally, when we think of something that’s called 
immeasurable, we mean immeasurably vast. Here the primary 
connotation of the term is not vastness but impartiality. The point of 
saying immeasurable compassion is compassion that is not going to 
help one person at the expense of hurting another. It is a compassion 
that is felt equally for all beings. The basis of the generation of such an 
impartial compassion is the recognition of the fact that all beings without 
exception really want and don’t want the same things. All beings without 
exception, want to be happy and want to avoid suffering. There is no 
being anywhere who really wants to suffer. If you understand that, and 
to the extent that you understand that, you will have the intense wish 
that all beings be free from suffering. And there is no being anywhere 
who does not want to be happy; and if you understand that, and to the 
extent that you understand that, you will have the intense wish that all 
beings actually achieve the happiness that they wish to achieve. Now 
because the experience of happiness and freedom from suffering depend 
upon the generation of the causes of these, then the actual form your 
aspiration takes is that all beings possess not only happiness but the 
causes of happiness, that they not only be free of suffering but of the 
causes of suffering. 
The causes of suffering are fundamentally the presence in our 
minds of mental afflictions—ignorance, attachment, aversion, jealousy, 
arrogance and so on—and it is through the existence of these that we 
11
Teachings on the Practice of Meditation 
come to suffer. Now through recognizing that there is a way to transcend 
these causes of suffering—fundamentally, through the eradication of 
these causes through practicing meditation, which may or may not 
happen immediately but is a definite and workable process—through 
this confidence, then this love—wishing beings to be happy—and the 
compassion of wishing beings to be free from suffering, is not hopeless 
or frustrated at all. Therefore, the boundless love and boundless 
compassion generate a boundless joy that is based on the confidence 
that you can actually help beings free themselves. 
So boundless love is the aspiration that beings possess happiness 
and the causes of happiness. Boundless compassion or immeasurable 
compassion is the aspiration that beings be free of suffering and the 
causes of suffering. And the actual confidence and the delight you 
take in the confidence that you can actually bring these about is 
boundless joy. Now because all of these are boundless or immeasurable 
or impartial, then they all have a quality which is equanimity. Which 
is to say that if these are cultivated properly, you don’t have love for 
one being and not for another, or less for another; you don’t have 
compassion for one being but none for another and so on. Now 
normally when we experience these qualities, of course they are partial; 
they are anything but impartial. In order to eradicate the fixation that 
causes us to experience compassion only for some and not for others, 
then you can actually train yourself in cultivating equanimity for beings 
through recognizing that they all wish for the same thing and wish to 
avoid the same thing, and through doing so you can greatly increase 
or enhance your loving-kindness and compassion. 
This has been a brief introduction to the practice of meditation, 
and how to train in and generate compassion. If you have any questions, 
please ask them. 
Question: Rinpoche, can you speak a little bit about the difference 
between pure projection and impure projection, and in particular where 
do pure projections actually come from? 
12
Generating Loving Kindness & Compassion 
Rinpoche: First of all, impure projections are how we experience because 
of the presence in our minds of kleshas or mental afflictions. Because 
we have kleshas, then we experience friend and enemy—that to which 
we are attached and that towards which we have aversion—we experience 
delight and disgust and so on. All of these ways we experience the world 
—all these ways we experience are fundamentally tinged with, at least 
tinged with unpleasantness. 
Now, what is called pure appearance or pure projection is based 
on the experience of the true nature or essential purity of what in 
confusion, we experience to be five types of mental affliction, or the five 
kleshas. The true nature of these five kleshas is what are called five 
wisdoms. For example, when you let go of fixation or obsession on a 
self, or with yourself, then the fundamental nature of the way you 
experience is a sameness, a lack of preference or partiality, which is called 
the wisdom of sameness. When you recognize the nature of all things, 
then that recognition which pervades or fills all of your experience is 
called the wisdom of the dharmadhatu. And so on. 
Now, when you experience the five wisdoms rather than the five 
kleshas or five mental afflictions, then instead of projecting all of the 
impurity which you project on the basis of experiencing the kleshas, 
you project purity, or you experience purity, which is the actual 
manifestation of these five wisdoms as realms, as forms of Buddhas, and 
these are what are called the pure appearances which are experienced by 
bodhisattvas and so forth. Now in order to approach this, in order to 
cultivate the experience of these wisdoms and the external experiences 
which go along with the experience of these wisdoms, we meditate upon 
the bodies of these Buddhas, the realms, palaces, and so on. By generating 
clarity of these visualized appearances and stabilizing that, then gradually 
we transform how we experience the world. 
Question: Rinpoche. In practicing compassion, there’s the practice of 
tonglen, which is the sending and receiving, taking the suffering from 
all sentient beings and giving them the happiness and merit that we 
have. In this practice, I’ve practiced it before, and it seems to go well for 
13
Teachings on the Practice of Meditation 
a while, but then there’s a subtle sense of “I” that creeps in that says, “I 
don’t really want to take the suffering,” or it’s, “I can’t deal with too 
many people having cancer, I just can’t take it all on myself,” and so one 
kind of loses a little courage in the practice. So could you illuminate us 
on this practice and how to overcome these obstacles and really develop 
the heroic mind? 
Rinpoche: What you say is very true, especially in the beginning of 
undertaking this practice. In fact, it’s okay that it be experienced that 
way. Even though there is a quality of faking it about the degree to 
which you actually really are ready to take on the suffering of others in 
the beginning, there’s still benefit in doing the practice, because up 
until you begin this practice, you've probably been entirely selfish. To 
even attempt to fake altruism is a tremendous improvement. But it 
doesn’t remain insincere like that, because eventually the habit starts to 
deepen and starts to counteract the habit of selfishness. 
Now, if when you began practicing tonglen, you already had one 
hundred percent concern with the welfare of others and no concern for 
your own welfare, then you wouldn't need to practice tonglen in the 
first place. So, it is designed to work for a practitioner who’s starting 
from a place of selfishness and to lead them into this place of concern 
for others. Then gradually, by using the practice you will actually cultivate 
the sincere desire to take suffering away from others and experience it 
yourself; you will cultivate real love and compassion for others. But on 
the other hand, you don’t really do the practice in order to be able to, at 
that moment take on the suffering of others and experience it yourself; 
youre really doing it in order to train your mind. By training your mind 
and developing the motivation and the actual wish to free others from 
suffering, then the long-term result is that you have the ability to directly 
dispel the suffering of others. 
Question: Rinpoche, you said that we may not be able to—one person 
may not be able to directly affect or remove short-term unhappiness or 
suffering of another person, but that we can learn to generate the basis 
14
Generating Loving Kindness & Compassion 
of another’s happiness, ultimate happiness. So could you say some more 
please about how one person can generate the basis of ultimate happiness 
of another person? 
Rinpoche: Well, the direct basis of establishing another being in a state 
of freedom or happiness, long-term or ultimate happiness, is being able 
to show them how to get rid of their mental afflictions and to teach 
them how to recognize and therefore abandon causes of suffering. 
Through doing so in that way, then you can establish them gradually in 
ultimate happiness. But even in cases where you can’t for whatever reason 
do that, by having the intention to benefit that being, then when you 
yourself become fully free, then you will be able to actually help them 
and gradually free and protect them as well. 
Question: Rinpoche, can you say a little more about the practice of 
letting go when the mind is agitated, as you described, as used in 
Mahamudra and Dzogchen? I experience my mind when I sit as being 
agitated and there’s the practice of letting go. I’m wondering if you can 
just say more about that in a practical way? 
Rinpoche: In general, the main approach that is taken in the 
Mahamudra and Dzogchen traditions is applied when you are looking 
at the nature of your mind. Now kleshas or mental afflictions are 
thoughts, and thoughts are the natural display of the mind. Thoughts 
may be pleasant, neutral or unpleasant, they may be positive or negative, 
but in any case, whatever type of thought arises, you deal with it in 
exactly the same way. You simply look directly at it. Now looking at the 
thought, or looking into the thought, or looking at the nature of the 
thought is quite different from analysing it. You don’t attempt to analyse 
the contents of the thought, nor do you attempt to think about the 
thought. You just simply look directly at it. When you look directly at a 
thought you don’t find anything. Now you may think that you don’t 
find anything because you don’t know how to look or you don’t know 
where to look, but in fact, that’s not the reason. The reason, according 
15
Teachings on the Practice of Meditation 
to the Buddha, is that thoughts are empty and this is the basic meaning 
of all the various teachings on emptiness he gave, such as the sixteen 
emptiness’ and so on. 
Now to use anger as an example of this, if you become angry and 
then you look directly at the anger—which doesn’t mean analyse the 
contents of the thoughts of anger, but you look directly at that specific 
thought of anger—then you won't find anything. And in that moment 
of not finding anything, the poisonous quality of the anger will somehow 
vanish or dissolve. Your mind will relax, and you will, at least to some 
extent be free of the anger. 
Now you may or may not at this point understand this, but in 
any case if you take the opportunity to work with this approach you 
may come to have some experience of this. 
  16
Correct Motivation 
YW hether we are practicing the dharma of the Vajrayana or 
listening to dharma or teaching it, we need to possess a pure 
motivation for doing so. Pure motivation here refers to bodhichitta. 
Now we have all entered the gate of the genuine dharma, so therefore, 
in general of course, we don’t have a negative motivation, and we're very 
fortunate to have the motivation we do have, to practice dharma. But at 
the same time, because we are ordinary people, at times our motivation 
may become somewhat impure. It’s necessary therefore to turn inward; 
and to actually look at your motivation and see what it really is. If your 
motivation is a good and genuine one, then you should delight in that 
and cause it to expand. But if you find that your motivation is a negative 
one, is based on a fixation on a self and so on, then simply let go of it 
and generate a pure motivation. Now when you consciously generate a 
pure motivation, initially it may seem as though you're faking something, 
but in the long term you are not really faking anything, because by 
intentionally cultivating, gradually it will become real and very much 
part of you. And here, by pure motivation we mean the attitude that 
you are doing the practice or study in order to benefit all beings. 
Because we possess the beginningless habit of fixation on the self, 
then it is natural for us, as far as our motivation goes, to desire our own 
happiness and our own benefit as our primary wish or goal. This is not 
particularly a bad motivation; it’s just a small minded or petty motivation. 
The small scope of this—the wish to benefit only yourself, which is 
characteristic at best of a lesser vehicle—is not wide enough, not big 
enough to serve as the proper motivation for the bodhisattva training of 
the Mahayana. Now if you recognize that this is your motivation, again 
17
Teachings on the Practice of Meditation 
let go of the self-obsessive quality of it, and generate the intention that 
what you're doing be of benefit to all beings who fill space. 
This motivation of wishing to practice and study in order to 
benefit all beings without exception is a type of bodhichitta or awakened 
mind. This type of bodhichitta is said to require two characteristics. 
The first is that it be compassion directed at all beings, which is to say 
that your intention be to benefit all beings who fill space. The second 
characteristic is that it have intelligence or wisdom; and in this case that 
means that the benefit you are attempting to accomplish for all beings 
is not merely a temporary benefit but their ultimate liberation, their 
ultimate freedom. So please listen to the teachings with the motivation 
of bodhichitta that possesses both this impartial compassion and this 
intelligence or wisdom. Because this motivation of bodhichitta is so 
important for the practice of Vajrayana, we possess a number of methods 
for increasing it and intensifying it. In general, these include of course 
meditations upon love and compassion, and in particular the practice 
of taking and sending, or the taking of suffering and the sending of 
happiness. Taking and sending, or tonglen, is a practice in which you 
imagine taking into yourself all of the suffering and causes of suffering 
which afflict others, and imagine giving to all others all of the happiness 
and causes of happiness which are within you. 
Normally this practice is co-ordinated with the breathing, which 
is to say that as you breathe in, you think that you breathe in all of the 
sufferings of all other beings, freeing them from these sufferings, and 
that as you breathe out, you send out with your breath all of your own 
happiness and virtue and so on, and that other beings thereby receive 
these and enjoy these things. Now, the meditation is “imagining” 
something, and yet it actually generates, over time, the intention in 
practitioners to be able to actually take on to themselves the sufferings 
of others and actually benefit others and relieve the sufferings of others. 
The practice of taking and sending, or tonglen, is co-ordinated 
with the breathing, and so therefore it is one of a variety of meditation 
practices which uses the breath. But in addition it uses visualization, 
and specifically the visualization of light, or rays of light. When you do 
18
Correct Motivation 
the practice, normally you consider that in front of you are all the 
countless sentient beings that exist. As you breathe out, you think that 
rays of brilliant, white, very, very luminous, brilliant light come out of 
you and strike and engulf all of those beings, causing all of the happiness 
and causes of happiness—virtue and so on—that have up to now been 
within you, to transfer to those beings, causing them to actually 
experience this happiness, to possess this happiness, as well as the cause 
of future happiness. As you breath in, you think that you take from all 
of these beings all of their misery, all of their suffering, and all of their 
pain, as well as the causes of their pain in the form of murky, smoky, 
grim—call it light, but it’s hard to call it light. It’s sort of smoky, grim 
light, and that you inhale this and that they are thereafter free of all of 
this suffering and the causes of future suffering. 
Now, according to the meditation you are actually taking onto 
yourself or into yourself the suffering and causes of suffering which 
would otherwise afflict others. But there is no actual danger that you 
will through doing this practice come to 
experience the conditions of suffering through 
doing it; the conditions of suffering which afflict 
others. Because in the practice you're cultivating oO 
a virtuous state of mind, a positive state of mind, 
which cannot become a cause for suffering, such O 
as experiencing the sufferings of others and so 
on. Nevertheless, because that is what you are eR 
imagining, and because what youre cultivating 
is the readiness to actually undertake the suffering 
of others, it’s natural that when beginners start 
to practice, they experience some fear. Now if you find that there is fear 
that inhibits your ability to do the practice, then it’s appropriate to 
imagine in the centre of your heart either a white HRI syllable, also 
very, very luminous and brilliant, like the rays you breathe out, or, if 
you wish, simply a mass of brilliant light. So when you breathe in all 
the smoky, murky, grim stuff, then you think that, rather than it’s filling 
your entire body, it all dissolves into and subsides into the HRI. HRI 
19
Teachings on the Practice of Meditation 
As well there exists the uncommon Vajrayana method of 
enhancing compassion, which is meditation upon the bodhisattva 
Avalokitesvara or Chenrezig. This is a technique for removing the 
suffering of others and especially for enhancing your own love and 
compassion. Chenrezig is the embodiment of the compassion of all 
buddhas and bodhisattvas, and as such is regarded as a wisdom deity 
and not as an external deity. Therefore, we tend primarily to relate to 
Chenrezig as the embodiment of our own fundamental nature. Because 
of this, while it is the case that in certain practices and at certain 
phases of the practice we visualize Chenrezig above our heads—we 
externalise him—nevertheless, because we are fundamentally viewing 
him as the embodiment of the compassion of all buddhas and the 
wisdom of all buddhas, and because the wisdom of all buddhas is our 
own essential nature, or buddha nature, and because we wish to reveal 
this nature by removing the secondary stains or obscurations which 
obscure it, and by revealing it to enhance our own compassion and so 
on, therefore, the principal practice related to Chenrezig is to visualize 
ourselves as Chenrezig, to think of our body as his body, our speech as 
his speech, and our mind as his mind. That is the basic format or 
basic technique of the Chenrezig meditation practice. 
Now the actual form the deity takes can vary. There are forms 
with a thousand arms and a thousand eyes, and there is the four- 
armed form and so on; and any of these forms will basically lead to 
the same result. The fundamental characteristic which they all have 
in common is that Chenrezig embodies the tremendous peace of 
complete compassion. 
The key point is that when you imagine yourself to be Chenrezig 
or visualize yourself as Chenrezig, you are not merely thinking of your 
body as a different type of body. You are relating to the body, speech 
and mind of the figure all at once. Now, in order specifically to relate to 
the mind of Chenrezig, then you visualize in the centre of your body, at 
the level of the heart, a six-petalled lotus, and in the centre of that lotus 
you visualize the compassion, the great compassion of all buddhas in 
the form of a brilliant white HRI syllable. Now surrounding that, you 
20
Correct Motivation 
visualize the six-syllable mantra OM MANI PEME HUNG. Then, rays 
of light go out from the mantra and purify the afflictions of beings. 
Now in general, Buddhists view the types of existences there 
are, the types of realms there are, as six different types of realms. These 
are held to be caused by the preponderance of one or another of the 
six fundamental mental afflictions or kleshas and their results. So, for 
example you think that from the syllable OM, the first syllable of the 
mantra, rays of light shoot out and purify all of the arrogance of all 
beings. Arrogance is the cause of rebirth as a god. Then from the 
second syllable MA, rays of light shoot out and purify and remove all 
of the competitiveness or jealousy which afflicts any and all beings. 
Jealousy is the cause of rebirth as an “asura,” who are very powerful 
and quarrelsome beings. Then from the third syllable NI, rays of light 
shoot out, and these purify passion, which is the root or the cause of 
rebirth as a human being and the experience of the human sufferings 
of birth, aging, sickness and death. From the fourth syllable, PE or 
PAD, rays of light shoot out and purify all of the mental dullness of 
all beings, which is the cause of rebirth as an animal, which rebirth is 
characterized by suffering due to bewilderment. Then from the fifth 
syllable ME, rays of light shoot out and purify and remove all of the 
greed which afflicts all beings. Greed is the cause of rebirth as a “preta” 
or hungry ghost, which experience is marked by tremendous hunger 
and thirst. Finally, the last syllable HUNG, radiates lots of light that 
purifies the affliction of anger, which is the cause of rebirth in the 
hells and the experience of intense heat and cold. 
So you're visualizing that these rays of light are removing all of 
the sufferings and causes of suffering that afflict all beings, and that as 
a result, all beings become both happy and free. So this is an effective 
method of enhancing or developing your love and compassion for all 
beings. But it also gradually reveals the inherent or innate great 
compassion which is within you and which is the essence of the wisdom 
of all buddhas and allows this to reveal or express itself. It is therefore a 
very effective technique. 
21
Teachings on the Practice of Meditation 
So, whether you are studying or listening to or practicing dharma, 
you need this motivation of love and compassion, and therefore we 
have specific practices to enhance it and develop it: in general, 
meditations on love and compassion; in particular, the precise 
instructions of taking and sending, and especially the extraordinary 
Vajrayana techniques such as the Chenrezig meditation and so on. 
  22
Posture 
Van main concern as practitioners is the recognition of the 
true nature of things or dharmata. In order to achieve this 
recognition, we need to let go of or relinquish those afflictions which 
obscure our capacity to recognize it and we need to enhance or expand, 
or allow to be revealed, the wisdom which can recognize it. Now the 
process of removing what obscures this nature and thereby revealing 
what recognizes it, as well as the nature itself, has to begin with the 
accomplishment of what is called tranquillity or shinay. Now, in fact 
shinay as a practice and as a result has two aspects: it has the aspect of 
peace or tranquillity, which means the pacification of the disturbance of 
thought, and it has the aspect of stillness, which is the capacity to rest 
the mind. These are the two qualities attained through shinay or 
tranquillity practice. 
Now in order to accomplish these, the actual technique, the actual 
practice as well, has two aspects. The first of these is the physical 
technique or physical posture, and the second is the mental technique. 
Of course the main thing in meditation is the mind and not the 
body, because it is the mind that actually performs the meditation. But 
at the same time our minds inhabit or rely upon our bodies, so therefore, 
physical posture is extremely important. 
Now the physical posture which was practiced by all of the 
founders and lineage holders of the Kagyu tradition is called the seven 
dharmas of Vairochana. Now Vairochana is the name of a particular 
Buddha and it also literally means “the illuminator.” Now there are two 
reasons why this posture is called that. One reason is the literal meaning 
of Vairochana. The posture is called the seven dharmas of the illuminator, 
23
Teachings on the Practice of Meditation 
of illumination, because if you take this posture, your mind’s natural 
clarity is enhanced or brought out, and therefore the recognition of 
your mind’s nature is greatly facilitated through the posture itself. The 
other reason why this posture is called that is that the Buddhas or victors 
of the five families, of whom Vairochana is one, are correlated with the 
five aggregates—which is to say that our five aggregates or skandhas are 
held in their true nature to be these five Buddhas. Now Vairochana is 
the pure nature or essence of the aggregate or skandha of form. Therefore, 
since it is through physical posture that the experience of form as an 
aggregate is transformed into the experience of its pure nature as the 
Buddha Vairochana, and on the basis of that, that the other aggregates 
can be worked with and gradually transformed, then for that reason as 
well, this posture is called the seven dharmas or seven points, you could 
say of Vairochana. 
The first of the seven points which make up this posture is the 
placement of the legs. The traditional explanation of this is that the legs 
should be crossed in what is called vajra asana or vajra posture, which is 
where the legs are fully crossed with the feet placed on the opposite 
thighs. Now, if you can cross your legs in this manner, this is the best 
posture, but if you cannot, it does not mean that you cannot meditate. 
The specific quality of the fully crossed or vajra posture is that it’s 
extremely stable. So the point of this posture in general, and this first 
point in particular, is that your sitting posture be as stable as possible. 
Now the reason for this is that, if you meditate standing up or walking 
about, which of course are acceptable postures and actions in post- 
meditation, your mind will be scattered. So rather than standing or 
walking, we meditate sitting down. You could also meditate lying down, 
and specific practices such as the dream and luminosity practices can be 
conducted in that way. But lying down is not the best posture for ordinary 
mediation, because just as standing up or walking makes your mind 
scattered, lying down makes your mind torpid. Sitting is the halfway 
point in between the two, so your mind is neither too dull nor too 
excited. If you can sit on the ground on a cushion, with your legs crossed 
that’s excellent, but if you can't, it’s also acceptable to sit on a chair. 
24
Posture 
The second point of posture is the placement of the hands. This 
is said to be the placement of the hands in the gesture of evenness or 
even placement. Now quite often this is taken to mean the actual mudra 
of even placement, which is found in iconographical paintings and 
statues, in which the left hand is placed palm up in your lap and the 
right hand is placed palm up, in or on the left hand, as in for example 
the position of the Buddha Amitabha and so on. This is acceptable as a 
meditation posture. The meaning of the words “even placement” however, 
has a wider connotation. It simply means that the hands should be 
placed at the same level, should be placed evenly, as opposed to for 
example, holding one hand aloft in space and placing the other one 
down on the ground. So it’s also acceptable to place the hands palms 
down on the thighs behind the knees. Either one of these interpretations 
of this second point of posture is fine. 
The third point of posture is that the spine be straight, which 
means that you sit up straight. The reason why it’s necessary to sit up 
straight when youre meditating is that your body and your mind are 
very connected. Specifically, your mind rides on, or is founded in, the 
winds or energies, which depend upon the channels which are present 
within your body. So if your posture is bent or crooked, if you're leaning 
to the left or to the right or you're leaning forward, then the channels 
will be bent as well, and if the channels are bent, then the winds won't 
flow smoothly and your mind will be in a state of agitation or unrest. If 
you sit up straight and your channels are straight, then the winds flow 
smoothly and properly, and your mind will be naturally at rest. 
The fourth point is that the upper arms be spread like the wings 
of a vulture. Now what actual form this takes depends upon which of 
the two positions of the hands you are using. If you are using the position 
where the hands are placed palm up in the lap, then it means that rather 
than allowing your elbows to be stuck to your sides, you bring them 
outward somewhat, like spread wings. If you're using the posture where 
your hands are palms down on the backs of the thighs just behind the 
knees, then instead of allowing your elbows to sink and be extremely 
bent, you straighten them somewhat. In either case, the function of this 
25
Teachings on the Practice of Meditation 
aspect of the posture is to make your entire posture somewhat more 
erect, and the function of that is to promote the clarity within your 
mind. So by doing this to your upper arms and elbows, then you 
somewhat prevent the occurrence of mental dullness in meditation. 
The fifth point of posture is that the neck be slightly bent, which 
is to say that you're not sticking your chin out. The reason for this is 
that by bending the neck slightly, bringing the chin in, then you naturally 
enhance your mindfulness and alertness. 
The sixth aspect of posture is that the tongue touch the palate. 
The reason for this is that this will cause less saliva to be present in your 
mouth and cause you to have to swallow saliva less often. Now this 
sounds extremely unimportant, but when you're actually practicing 
meditation, if you constantly have to swallow saliva, it’s very distracting. 
The seventh point of posture is the gaze. Now, if your eyes are 
closed when you meditate, this tends to make your mind dull. But on 
the other hand, if your eyes are wide open and you're staring at what 
you see, then this will distract you. So the gaze for meditation here is to 
look straight; it is that you look naturally straight forward. Now when 
you're practicing tranquillity you would still look straight forward as far 
as left and right is concerned, but slightly downwards as far as up and 
down is concerned. In any case, you don’t direct your attention to what 
you see. You don’t try not to focus the eyes, but you don’t send your 
mind after your vision. So whether you see things or not, whether your 
eyes are focusing clearly or not, you simply don’t follow it, you don’t run 
after it. Instead, you look at your mind. In other words, you perform 
the meditation. 
Well, those are the seven points of posture which are called the 
seven dharmas of Vairochana. At the same time, when you implement 
this, your body needs to be comfortable, which is to say that the posture 
should be neither tense nor rigid, and should not be uncomfortable. 
This means that if any particular point of the posture is painful or 
uncomfortable for you—if it causes pain in your arms or pain in your 
legs or pain in your spine or back—then you should not force yourself 
to take this posture. There’s no rule that all seven points of this posture 
26
Posture 
have to be present in order to meditate. The point of the posture is to 
allow your channels, and therefore your winds to come comfortably to 
rest through taking a certain physical posture. But if taking this posture 
defeats its own purpose by generating too much tension and pain, 
then you should not force yourself to do it, and you should not think 
that all points of this posture are absolutely essential for the practice 
of meditation. 
In Tibet, there arose eight principal traditions of meditation 
practice. The initial progenitors of these eight traditions are called the 
eight chariots of the practice lineages. Now, one of these eight traditions 
is called severance, or chod, and the source of the teachings of chod 
was a Tibetan woman, [a mahasiddha] named Machig Labdron, and 
she is therefore considered one of these eight great teachers who founded 
the practice lineages. In her teachings on meditation, she said that the 
physical posture is relaxation of the four limbs. Now what that means 
is that one of the most essential points of physical posture is that you 
relax your muscles, your joints, and your sinew, that you don’t attempt 
to maintain the physical posture with physical exertion or muscular 
exertion. This means, when you're practicing, if you discover tension, 
physical tension in a specific part of your body or part of your posture, 
then you should consciously relax that part and let go of that tension. 
She further said the mental posture or the mental technique is to destroy 
fixated perception. Now here “destroy fixated perception” means to 
neither follow nor expel thoughts, just simply let go of them as they 
arise, neither to attempt to follow their content nor to attempt to get 
rid of them or chase them out. The posture of speech, or the technique 
of speech, is to sing melodiously of experience. Now this means that 
the actual use of melody and so on in liturgy—for example in 
supplications and so forth—can actually enhance meditation practice 
and experience. In any case, the physical posture, as she said, needs to 
be one where your muscles are relaxed. 
So that is the physical posture. 
27
  
      
The Nine Stages of Meditation?  
Mental Technique 
MVM. the mental technique that has been presented by most 
teachers of our tradition is to follow the breath, and indeed, 
» this was taught by the Buddha, who said, “When thoughts are intense, 
follow the breath.” Because it is a technique of tranquillity meditation 
practice that is appropriate for anyone, it’s always okay to use this 
technique. Sometimes however, it’s also helpful to let your mind simply 
rest without a specific object to focus on other than itself: So sometimes 
just let your mind rest without following the breath, provided you're 
not distracted. But what I’m going to talk about now is not a specific 
technique you use, but how you relate to the meditation of tranquillity 
in general. 
Normally we have a lot of thoughts running through our minds, 
and many of these are based on recollections of or thinking about the 
past. Others are thoughts that beckon the future—speculation about 
what may happen or what we want to happen. Now, when a thought 
arises that is concerned with the past, then simply let it go, and when a 
thought arises that is speculation about the future, also, simply let it go. 
Now, thoughts about the future can present themselves as having 
some special status, being very important. You may think, “I have to 
think about this.” When that thought arises, then simply remind yourself 
that there are twenty-four hours in a day, and at this moment you have 
designated this time as meditation time, not as thinking-about-the-future 
time. You can simply say to yourself, “I will think about this later.” 
Now, rather than thinking about the past or thinking about the 
future, what is recommended in meditation is simply to maintain a 
direct awareness of your present experience, the present moment. This 
29
Teachings on the Practice of Meditation 
means that while thoughts will continue to arise—and they may be 
extremely intense, they may have a strong emotional tinge or content to 
them— simply don’t follow them, don’t get involved with the content 
of thought. Now, this does not inhibit in any way the clarity of your 
mind. Not following a thought does not make you less aware. It makes 
you less conceptual. So, if you allow your mind to simply rest in direct 
experience of the present moment and are not drawn by the contents of 
the thoughts that arise in your mind, then your mind will come to 
abide in a state of natural peace, which is extremely helpful. 
Now, when you rest in awareness of the present moment and do 
not think about the past or the future, then for a short time not much 
thinking will happen; not many thoughts will appear. This resting in 
the present moment is not the same thing as trying to get rid of thoughts. 
It’s not like the thought, “I must get rid of all my thoughts,” which is a 
thought, or, “I must cultivate a state of non-conceptuality.” It’s not a 
recollection or reflection upon your intention and motivation in 
meditation. It’s a state that is, in itself, free of thoughts of hope and fear. 
Now, we are not free of hope and fear. We hope to attain buddhahood. 
We hope to attain freedom and so on. But, while those are your 
motivations, in the context of the meditation, you do not entertain 
them. In other words, the thoughts, “I would like this to go well; I 
would like this meditation to work out; I’m afraid it might not; I’m 
afraid I’m thinking too much,” have no special status. These are thoughts 
just like any other thoughts. So what you are cultivating here is simply 
allowing your mind to rest naturally in present experience, and no 
thought that could possibly arise in that state is an exception, and 
therefore, any thought is just simply let go of naturally. 
Now, initially you can only do this for a very brief period of time. 
The faculty which you are applying at that point—and it’s also a term 
for the experience or stage of experience—is called “placement.” 
Placement here is simply being able to rest your mind for a very brief 
period of time without thinking about the past or the future. Now as 
you continue to practice, then these very, very brief periods of placement 
will start to somewhat lengthen—which is to say, the period of time 
30
Mental Technique 
during which you can rest in present awareness without becoming 
distracted by a thought, without losing awareness to a thought, will 
lengthen. When these periods get somewhat lengthened, then that stage 
and that faculty is called “continual placement.” Continual doesn’t mean 
unbroken or continuous; it just means slightly longer. Then there is the 
further development of being able to return from distraction, and this is 
called “returning placement,” or “returning to placement.” This is being 
able, through the use of mindfulness and alertness, to recognize that 
youve become distracted and to return to this placement, this state of 
direct or simple awareness. 
  31
Transforming 
Consciousness into Wisdom 
ff, TS he technique of meditation that I have explained so far was one 
in which you have no particular object on which you focus, but 
rather in which you allow your mind to come to rest naturally. Now the 
ability to allow your mind to remain at rest without a particular object 
on which you focus depends upon the presence of the faculties of 
mindfulness and alertness. Essentially, mindfulness is the actual 
recollection or memory of your intention, which is the recollection that 
you are attempting to remain without being distracted. By being 
distracted, we mean following thoughts, getting involved in the content 
of thoughts. Mindfulness is therefore the faculty of recollecting that 
you are engaged in the act of meditation and are not going to follow 
your thoughts. Mindfulness is a mental formation (Skt. samskara), and 
as long as it is present in the act of meditation, as long as this mindfulness 
is present, then your mind can remain at rest. The mindfulness also will 
bring out the natural clarity or lucidity of your mind and will produce 
a state of mental stability. As long as this mindfulness is present, then 
you will also possess alertness as well. 
In order to practice meditation you need to understand something 
about the characteristics and workings of your mind. This is studied 
throughout the Buddhist tradition, and in particular in the Vajrayana 
tradition. The first thing that needs to be understood is that we can 
make a distinction between the mind and mental arising or mental 
formations, and the way we look at or classify the mind varies a little bit 
between different traditions. 
33
Teachings on the Practice of Meditation 
In the context of the Shravakayana, or the vehicle of the hearers, 
then it is said that mind consists of six types of consciousnesses. These 
are six types of consciousnesses that we experience clearly, that manifest 
clearly in our experience. In the Mahayana traditions we generally talk 
about eight types of consciousnesses, which are those six types of 
consciousnesses which are experienced clearly plus another two which 
are constantly present and are never particularly clearly manifest. 
With regard to the six consciousnesses, the first five of these are 
what are called the consciousnesses of the five gates, the five gates referring 
to the five senses. The first of these is the eye consciousness. The eye 
consciousness is that which experiences as its object visual form, various 
shapes and colours and so on, on the basis of or relying upon the organic 
support of the physical eye. That is the eye consciousness. The second is 
the ear consciousness, which in much the same way experiences its 
objects, which are the various sounds, pleasant and unpleasant and 
neutral and so on, through the medium of relying upon its organic 
support, which is the ear. The third consciousness is called the nose 
consciousness, and it experiences various smells as objects, through the 
organic support, or relying upon the organic support of the nose. The 
fourth is the tongue consciousness, which experiences various tastes— 
sweet, bitter, sour, salty, and so on—relying upon the organic support 
of the tongue. The fifth consciousness is called the body consciousness 
or tactile consciousness, and the objects of this consciousness are all 
forms of tactile sensation. Whereas the other four organic supports were 
specific sense organs, which primarily perform their specific functions, 
here the organic support is the entire body, all of which can detect or 
feel a tactile sensation. So the fifth consciousness is called either the 
body consciousness or the tactile consciousness. 
The sixth consciousness is the mental consciousness, and it’s always 
enumerated by the learned as the sixth because in the case of any of the 
first five consciousnesses, it will ensue after them or follow upon them. 
In general, the object of the sixth consciousness is all things, anything 
that can be thought of, because it is this consciousness that thinks about 
the past, thinks about the future, thinks about the present. But also this 
34
Transforming Consciousness into Wisdom 
consciousness experiences all of the objects of the five senses: forms, 
sounds, smells, tastes, and tactile sensations. However, it does not 
experience them in the direct and clear manner of the five sense 
consciousnesses themselves. What happens is that following the 
generation of one of the sense consciousnesses, a mental replica or image 
of that particular sense consciousness is generated, which is called a 
mental consciousness. This mental replica is not a direct experience, 
but has been called a vague approximation. Now this vague 
approximation forms the basis for the subsequent conceptuality of 
recognizing it as such and such, or good and bad and so on, which 
ensues. Therefore, while it does base some of its content upon the five 
sense consciousnesses, the sixth consciousness itself does not rely upon 
a particular organic support like a sense organ. It’s generated following 
any of the five and can also arise under other circumstances. It relies 
essentially upon cognition, or cognitive capacity itself, as its support. 
Now the five sense consciousnesses are non-conceptual, which 
means that they can only perform their specific function of mere 
experience. So the eye consciousness sees forms and the ear consciousness 
hears sounds and so on. Therefore, they can only experience the present, 
and only directly. Now the present and the past and the future are 
important concepts which are discussed a great deal in the study of 
Buddhism. The present of course, ceases immediately, and by ceasing it 
becomes the past. The future, which does not yet exist while it is the 
future, occurs, at which point, once it has occurred, it is not the future 
any more but is the present. So the present, this term “the present,” or 
“now,” really refers to an instant in between the past and the future and 
this is all the five sense consciousnesses can experience. Your eyes for 
example, can only see the present. Your eyes cannot see what is past nor 
can they see what is the future. Not only that, but your eyes cannot 
estimate or evaluate the present. Your eye consciousness only sees shapes 
and colours. It does not in itself, recognize these various shapes and 
colours as some “thing” or another, does not conceptualise about them. 
Now all of the five sense consciousnesses are, in the same way, non- 
conceptual. The sixth consciousness however is conceptual, because it 
35
Teachings on the Practice of Meditation 
recognizes things, it brings concepts to bear upon experience and thereby 
confuses the experiences with the concepts about those experiences, 
including the confusion of a present experience with a past experience 
of something similar or apparently the same. So the sixth consciousness, 
which is conceptual, not only experiences the present but brings the 
concepts of the past and the future to bear upon this present experience. 
Those six consciousnesses are called unstable or fluctuating, which 
means that they are suddenly generated by the presence of various causes 
and conditions, and then they cease when those causes and conditions 
are no longer present. 
The other two consciousnesses in the list of eight, which are the 
consciousness which is the mental afflictions and the all-basis 
consciousness, are by contrast referred to as constant consciousnesses, 
which means that they are not suddenly generated and then suddenly 
ceasing; they are always present. However, while they are always there, 
they are not clear or manifest or obvious, like the first six. They are 
always there, but they are very hard to detect. The first of these two, the 
seventh consciousness or the consciousness which is the mental 
afflictions, or klesha consciousness, is the innate fixation on a self that 
we all possess or that afflicts all of us. It’s this innate assumption of “I.” 
Now this is present whether we recollect it or not, whether we think of 
it or not, whether we're conscious or not, whether we're walking or 
sitting. No matter what we're doing, this persists. Now sometimes when 
we think “I,” we generate a literally conscious fixation on a self. That is 
not the seventh consciousness. That is the sixth consciousness’s version 
of fixation on a self, because that is sometimes there and sometimes not. 
The seventh consciousness, this fundamental fixation on a self, is always 
there, and in fact it will be there until you attain the eighth level of 
bodhisattva realization. 
The eighth consciousness is called the all-basis consciousness, 
and it is the mere cognitive lucidity which is the fundamental basis for 
the rest of the functionings of mind. Because it is the basis for all of the 
rest of the mental functioning’s or activities, it’s called the all-basis. 
Now, it is on this basis that all of the habits of samsara are piled: habits 
36
Transforming Consciousness into Wisdom 
of karma, of kleshas and so on. Through variations in one’s habituation— 
the habits that you accumulate—then various results arise. Through 
various types of habituation, then you tend to cultivate more virtuous 
and fewer un-virtuous states of mind, or the other way around; and 
through all of these variations and habituation which produce habits 
that are laid onto or piled onto the all-basis, then you experience the 
world in your own particular way. Various appearances arise, and you 
experience the fluctuations; and to the extent you experience fluctuations 
in the degree of mental affliction, you experience fluctuations in your 
intelligence and your compassion and so on. 
Now the all-basis, together with the other seven—all of these— are 
what are called the eight consciousnesses. And through the practice of 
meditation in particular and the practice of dharma in general, gradually 
these are transformed into what are called the five wisdoms, which means 
that their basic nature is revealed. The full revelation of these, the full 
transformation of the manifestation of these from the samsaric 
manifestation of the eight consciousnesses into the pure manifestation, 
is the five wisdoms.’ The full and final extent of this is buddhahood. 
Ultimately of course, the eight consciousnesses have to be 
completely transformed into the five wisdoms. But when we're beginning 
to practice meditation, and in particular tranquillity and insight 
meditation, which of these eight consciousnesses are we actually using? 
The five sense consciousnesses are outward directed, which is to say, 
they can only perform their specific non-conceptual functions of seeing, 
hearing, smelling, tasting and experiencing tactile sensations, respectively. 
Therefore, they cannot be used in an intentional act of meditation. The 
two constant consciousnesses, the consciousness which is the mental 
afflictions and the all-basis consciousness, are of course ultimately things 
we want to get rid of. But we don’t need to try to get rid of them now, 
principally because we cannot get rid of them now; we can’t even detect 
them directly. So they also cannot be used in the process of meditation. 
The only consciousness among the eight which fulfils the necessary 
criteria for being a tool we can use in meditation, and also needs to be 
applied in this way or it will continue to get more and more confused— 
37
Teachings on the Practice of Meditation 
will continue to get worse—is the sixth consciousness, the mental 
consciousness. The sixth consciousness is conceptual and therefore can 
support an intentional act of meditation. The sixth consciousness also 
is that which generates and experiences thoughts and all the various 
sorts of kleshas which are the contents of thoughts. It can be refined. 
While it is very coarse in its usual manifestation, the sixth consciousness 
can be softened; it can be refined. 
So it is the sixth consciousness that actually meditates. Now the 
way the sixth consciousness arises is as a central mind, surrounded so to 
speak by mental arisings. The mind, the central mind, is the cognitive 
clarity itself and the mental arisings are the various things that appear 
in the mind. There are various lists of these. For example, there are 
those that are always present in any intentional or volitional action, 
such as sensation, intelligence, intention, resolution and so on. Then 
there are those that are specifically virtuous, such as faith and compassion, 
and those that are specifically negative, such as spitefulness. 
All of these arise under various circumstances, together with the 
sixth consciousness and whichever of them arise depends upon the 
habituation of that particular individual. 
Some of these can be either virtuous or un-virtuous; for example, 
sleep is one that can be virtuous sometimes and un-virtuous other times. 
Now, among these mental arisings, the ones that we employ in 
the practice of meditation are ones such as samadhi, or mental absorption, 
which is the faculty of the mind’s remaining stable, without moving or 
changing; and then mindfulness or recollection, which was presented 
earlier, and is the faculty of not forgetting, or the faculty of recollecting 
what you are trying to do and what you are trying not to do; and then 
alertness, which comes along with mindfulness, as well as intention, 
and we would have to say, resolution or will, which is a further 
development of intention. 
Now, the way that you employ these in meditation is not to 
attempt to overpower or control rigidly the sixth consciousness, but to 
allow your mind to simply relax naturally. The relaxation of the mind in 
this way is the beginning of tranquillity or shinay. When you are 
38
Transforming Consciousness into Wisdom 
meditating, you need to relax into a state of stillness, which is to say 
where your mind is at rest, without impeding the mind’s clarity or 
lucidity. While you're practicing, there will arise a variety of experiences. 
Some of them are lucid, some of them are not lucid. Among the 
experiences which will arise, there are some that indicate defects in the 
meditation. One of these is torpor, which has two varieties. There’s 
what we could call torpor itself, and there’s obscurity, which is a further 
development of that. Torpor is the absence of clarity, the absence of any 
cognitive lucidity in the meditation, and obscurity is even beyond that, 
where there’s a thick dullness. Now the problem with torpor and obscurity 
is that obviously they bring about the disappearance of mindfulness 
and therefore of alertness as well. 
Another problem that can arise in meditation is called excitement. 
Excitement is when the lucidity of the mind becomes too intense and 
becomes conceptual and therefore the mind generates lots of thoughts— 
past, present, future and so on—that are so many and so intense that 
you can’t stop them or let go of them. Now this can be either a pleasant 
or an unpleasant excitement. It could be excessive excitement in being 
too happy or too enthusiastic. Or it could be a feeling of deep 
unhappiness or discontentment. In either case the result is the thoughts 
which distract you. 
Now, there are obviously a lot of things that can go wrong with 
meditation, but basically all of them are included within these two types 
of defects, torpor and excitement. 
There are three things you can do in general to get rid of either of 
these defects. The three things are what we could call; external changes, 
visualization and using motivation. 
If we look at torpor, first of all, using motivation to get rid of 
torpor can be effective, because the nature of torpor is a mental dullness, 
which is to some extent, a lack of motivation. So therefore, recollecting 
the qualities of the dharma and of the Buddha and recollecting the 
benefits of meditation can sometimes promote the clarity that will cut 
through the torpor. 
39
Teachings on the Practice of Meditation 
Then, secondly, using external changes would be for example, 
making sure that the place in which you are meditating is sufficiently 
illuminated—possibly turning up the lights—and making sure that 
youre not too hot, that youre not overdressed, and that your body is 
cool enough. 
Then with regard to visualization, when you are experiencing 
torpor, you can visualize in your heart, which is to say in your body at 
the level of the heart, a white four-petalled lotus, which is very, very 
bright and brilliant; and in the centre of this lotus is a tiny white sphere 
of light. Then having visualized that, you think that the sphere of light 
comes up through the centre of your body and shoots out the top of 
your head. That visualization is very helpful for dispelling torpor. 
Then there are three corresponding ways to work with excitement. 
Generally speaking, excitement can come from either pleasant or 
unpleasant mental states. You could be excited or agitated by guilt for 
example, or you could be agitated or excited by something that makes 
you very happy, that you can’t stop thinking about. In either case, the 
basic problem is that the thoughts keep coming back again and again 
and again, and you can’t get rid of them. Generally speaking, the way to 
work with motivation here is to cultivate a little bit of sadness. Sadness 
is very helpful for dealing with excitement. So you could contemplate 
the defects of samsara, the sufferings of the lower realms, impermanence 
and so on. Generally speaking, anything that lessens clinging, fixation 
and attachment will help with the problem of excitement. 
Now the second way to work with it is using external changes in 
the environment. Whereas when you were working with the problem of 
torpor you wanted everything bright and cool, and you wanted your 
physical posture as erect as possible, here you can actually slump a little 
bit, and it may help calm you down. Especially the room in which you 
meditate should be not too bright if you're suffering from excitement, 
and you should make sure you’re warm enough. You should be at least 
warm enough when this problem occurs. 
Then, thirdly, as for visualization, in this case you visualize that 
this four-petalled lotus in your heart is jet black in colour, and the little 
40
Transforming Consciousness into Wisdom 
sphere of light in its centre is also black. This time, instead of going up, 
you think that it, the little sphere of light, drops down from the lotus, 
goes straight down the middle of your body, out of the bottom, and 
keeps on going down into the ground; and that will help very much to 
calm you down. 
Question: You mentioned about the sixth consciousness. Its support is 
non-organic. It doesn’t have any fixation the way the previous five senses 
do. In what way does it fixate on cognition, and what role does the 
brain have to play with mind? 
Rinpoche: Well, all of the consciousnesses rely to some degree upon 
the brain as an organic support in how they operate. But the sixth does 
not particularly do so more than the others. The reason that the sixth is 
not said to have a specific organic support is that the sixth consciousness 
arises to investigate and label the immediately preceding consciousness. 
Now the immediately preceding consciousness could be one of the five 
sense consciousnesses or it could be another sixth consciousness. For 
example, suppose you have an eye consciousness of various shapes and 
colours. Then that ceases. Immediately upon its cessation, a sixth 
consciousness will arise that will attempt to distinguish and recognize 
and then label and have opinions about what the eye consciousness saw. 
In the same way, after an ear consciousness occurs, in which maybe you 
heard someone say something, then immediately after that ear 
consciousness ceases, a mental consciousness will arise which will attempt 
to recognize the words, if they were words, and then to do such things 
as decide, “Well, were they true, or were they false,” and so on. The 
same thing happens when you smell something, when you taste 
something, when you have a tactile sensation; immediately after the 
cessation of the sense consciousness, the mental consciousness arises 
and starts to investigate. Now this can occur also with and subsequent 
to a mental consciousness. In other words, when a mental consciousness 
ceases, then subsequently, immediately afterwards, another mental 
consciousness will arise that will have opinions about that previous 
4]
Teachings on the Practice of Meditation 
mental consciousness. That’s how a thought is generated on the basis of 
a previous thought, for example. 
It’s for this reason that in abhidharma, the mental consciousness 
is said to rely upon the cessation of a previous consciousness as its 
support. So its support is not organic the way it is for the sense 
consciousnesses. It’s not that it’s totally uninvolved with the sense 
consciousnesses; it’s that the support for its specific function is the 
cessation of the previous consciousness which makes up its subject 
matter or object. 
Question: We tend to develop our habits; a small child ona playground 
takes the toy away from the other one, and then as we grow our habits 
become more sophisticated, and we learn more politeness and so as we 
advance toward adulthood our structure of habits begins to lie one on 
top of the other, like layers of an onion. But I’ve noticed that when I’m 
under tremendous pressure, my sophisticated adult habits will very often 
revert back to more childish responses, and I’m curious how, as we 
advance on the path of meditation, we dispel all of that. Do we take the 
onion layers back away one by one and move towards childhood, or is it 
some other mechanism? 
Rinpoche: It’s true that there is a directness and simplicity about the 
behaviour of children in general, but the simplicity is foolish. Children 
are not simple and straightforward and direct because they are more 
virtuous, but because they don’t know any other way to be. They don’t 
understand tact or politeness. However, this can vary a great deal among 
children. Some children are very clever indeed from early on. Some 
children are very selfish; some children think only of others. The 
variations among children, like the variations among adults, depend 
upon the previous habits which those children came into this life with. 
Now, while it’s true that in certain types of crisis we can forget some of 
the habits we’ve accrued in our socialization as adults and revert to our 
behaviour as children, but this is not what happens when you practice 
meditation. Because what meditation uncovers or reveals is not your 
42
Transforming Consciousness into Wisdom 
habits from early life but the inherent lucidity that is what your mind 
is, fundamentally, and this lucidity is your basic intelligence. As it is . 
revealed, and as it intensifies, your wisdom, in a practical sense, increases. 
You become more sensitive to what needs to be done. Of course you 
become less deceptive and so on, but your truthfulness is not based on 
self-interest; it would be based on a lack of competitiveness, of arrogance, 
and so on. All of the inherent goodness in your mind starts to reveal 
itself, and your spitefulness and so on diminish. 
In general, our thoughts serve to obscure and suppress our 
innate wisdom and our innate qualities. As you let go of the confusion 
of thought, this innate wisdom starts to reveal itself, it starts to rise 
up to the surface. As it reveals itself, your understanding of things 
grows accordingly. 
Question: Sometimes when I’m working I’m very focused and very 
alert and very aware and very mindful. Not always, but sometimes. My 
question is, can that be, or is that a form of meditation, or can it be 
made a form of meditation, and do you have ways to enhance that, or 
recommendations on how to enhance work as meditation? 
Rinpoche: Well, this is not meditation in the sense of even placement, 
in the sense of actual meditation practice, but it is mindfulness and it is 
helpful. First of all, and most obviously, the more mindful and alert you 
are when you're working, the better your work will be. But the way to 
use this in meditation practice is that, if you actually practice meditation, 
which is to say allowing the mind to rest evenly as was explained, and in 
that context, intentionally apply mindfulness and alertness, and cultivate 
non-distraction, then in post-meditation, by maintaining this type of 
natural mindfulness that arises when you're working or in other post- 
meditation activities, you'll very much support the practice of meditation. 
But meditation does have to be actually practiced. 
Question: I’m wondering, how does creating a new mental formation, 
such as visualization, remove other mental formations such as samskaras, 
43
Teachings on the Practice of Meditation 
and is it a process of suppression, weakening, or can it completely 
eradicate those samskaras? 
Rinpoche: Well, first of all there isn’t really such a thing as a new 
mental arising, in the sense of a new type. According to the common 
lists, the usual number of fifty-one types of mental arisings includes all 
the various types of things that can arise within the mind. These are all 
of the various sorts of things which are brought together, or, say brought 
around, introduced, by the fourth aggregate of formation, which in this 
case refers to mental formations or mental arisings. Now these can be 
both virtuous and un-virtuous, and they can be neutral, and so on. So 
in a sense, this aggregate is that which performs alot of the functions of 
samsara. But the nature of the aggregate itself is not inherently samsaric, 
so therefore it can be transformed; and the transformation of this fourth 
aggregate of samskara or formation consists of the increasing of the 
useful mental formations, the ones that are necessary and/or useful, and 
the letting go of the useless or counterproductive ones. As this process 
goes on, then gradually this aggregate is transformed into what is called 
the wisdom of accomplishment. When this is completed, this is the 
transformation of all forms of attachment and aversion and deception 
and so on. All of this stuff is transformed into a tremendous capacity to 
accomplish anything, to get anything done in a very practical way. 
Now in general, the meditation upon deities, of course, is 
connected with this and all kinds of transformation, but not in particular 
with working with mental formations alone. 
Question: Rinpoche, you talked about tonglen, taking and sending. As 
far as I can remember, you said that when we practice tonglen, we didn’t 
necessarily take part in or were involved in the conditions of suffering 
that we were taking in. If we're not involved in the conditions, which I 
think is like cause and effect, then how can we become involved, or how 
can we participate? How can we become non-dual if we have nothing to 
do with those conditions? Could you say a little more about that? 
44
Transforming Consciousness into Wisdom 
Translator: I suspect this is something in the way I translated it. It 
sounds like doublespeak on my part, if it’s what I remember. I'll check. 
I think it’s me, not him, but let’s find out. 
Let me say what I remember Rinpoche saying. What I think he 
may have said was that, although when you're practicing taking and 
sending, you actually generate the intention to take on the sufferings of 
others, you will not actually experience those “sufferings.” And I said 
“conditions” —I remember saying that, but I don’t remember his saying 
that. But I can ask him. 
Translator: Well he said he did say conditions, but I think he’s just 
covering up for me. 
Rinpoche: The point is that the distinction that was being made, in 
any case, was between the intention to take on the sufferings of others 
and actually experiencing the sufferings of others. When you're doing 
the meditation, you actually think, “May I actually take on the sufferings 
of others; may they not have to experience them; may only I have to 
experience them.” And you generate that intention as vividly and as 
genuinely as you can. But it is impossible. You cannot experience the 
sufferings of others. Because experience is entirely individual. Experiences 
may be similar, but they cannot be shared or transferred. An individual's 
experience of suffering or any other kind of experience comes from the 
individual’s accumulated karma and habits. If you have not accumulated 
the karma and habits to have a certain experience, you cannot experience 
it on the basis of somebody else’s accumulation of karma and habits. So 
in fact, you cannot actually take the experiences of others away from 
them and experience them yourself. However, it is meaningful to generate 
the intention to do so, because by generating the intention to experience 
the suffering of others and to give them all of your happiness, then you 
are cultivating an attitude which sees others as much more important 
than yourself, which is a very powerful and direct contravention of our 
most dangerous and negative habit. And, because you're cultivating the 
intention to take on the sufferings of others, while you cannot literally 
45
Teachings on the Practice of Meditation 
do that, the generation of that intention will cause you to help them a 
great deal. So it does benefit others. But you can’t literally experience 
their suffering. 
Question: My question is also about tonglen. Do you think that there 
should be any prerequisite experience before practicing tonglen, such as 
meditating for some length of time or some experience with shinay, or 
taking the refuge vow or taking the bodhisattva vow? 
Rinpoche: Of course it’s good that people have some preparation, such 
as meditation experience and the vow of the refuge and so on, before 
they practice tonglen. But there’s no necessity that they have any such 
prior experience or commitment. If someone who has not taken the 
vow of refuge practices tonglen with pure intention, then they will still 
increase their love and compassion. They'll still be able to cultivate the 
desire and intention to benefit others. With regard to the need, in 
particular, for a prior experience of shinay, then, if someone who has 
very good shinay practices tonglen, then of course it will be very effective. 
But even if someone who doesn’t have very good shinay —someone 
who hasn’t practiced shinay very much—practices tonglen, it will still 
benefit them. So because there’s still benefit, it’s not appropriate to say 
there is such and such requirement. 
Question: Rinpoche, getting back to the previous question about tonglen, 
I have two questions that arose from that. One is that it’s sort of—I’ve 
never heard it in teachings per se, but it’s commonly talked about that a 
lama takes on the karma of his disciples; that’s why he’s sick or whatever. 
So is actually taking on the sickness—is that mostly for enlightened beings 
only? And secondly, when we want to benefit a particular sentient being 
—maybe it might not be in the teachings; you're supposed to pray for 
all beings—but it’s natural when our lama is sick or our mother is sick 
or whatever, we want to benefit that person, so we're doing practice just 
for that person, not with our meditation in mind whatsoever. So would 
we do Tara practice? Is that more appropriate at that point? 
46
Transforming Consciousness into Wisdom 
Rinpoche: The answer to your first question is that it’s not possible to 
really take on the karma of another being, and that when lamas or 
gurus appear to do so, of course they have the intention to do so, the 
wish to do so. They wish they could you know. And because they wish 
they could, then they may sometimes appear to do so, largely because of 
the attitude of people around them. But in fact, they are not really 
literally taking on and experiencing what would otherwise be the suffering 
of others. Not literally. 
The second question: It’s acceptable to do tonglen as a practice in 
order to benefit another specific person or specific set of persons, provided 
that your intention is really to benefit them—provided that you're not 
just doing it and cultivating it as sort of an attachment. But if you're 
actually doing it to benefit those people, of course it’s fine. 
  47
The Tantric Path & Mahamudra 
ff fs to feel that since students were mainly interested in, and 
e experienced with, the practices of tranquillity and insight that 
dealing with these topics alone would be the most beneficial thing to 
do. Since the practices of the generation stage, the yidam* practices 
are slightly unwieldy or complicated at first, and because the 
appearances of the deities, the male and female deities, the peaceful 
and wrathful deities, in all their various costumes and with their sceptres 
and their various appearances and so forth are all a bit bewildering, 
and therefore since new students were usually not that interested in 
this subject, I felt that I didn’t really need to address it. But since then 
I’ve come to feel that while it is true that people have more interest 
initially in tranquillity and insight than they have in the generation 
stage, I think it is my responsibility to inform students about the 
generation stage in order to inspire some interest in it and so that 
people will have some understanding of it. Therefore I’m going to talk 
a bit about this. 
Many people feel or think the following: “Iam not a yidam. Iam 
an ordinary person. Visualizing myself as a deity, especially one with an 
abnormal number of faces, or a particularly large number of arms, or a 
deity who is brilliant red or pure white in colour, seems quite useless to 
me. What is the use of doing such a thing?” Well in fact, such practices 
are extremely useful. 
Of course we are ordinary people, but at the same time the basic 
nature of any ordinary person is the essence of the wisdom of all Buddhas, 
which in the sutras is called buddha nature and in the Vajrayana is 
called the wisdom of the great perfection, or the wisdom of Mahamudra 
49
Teachings on the Practice of Meditation 
and so on. As this is our basic nature and always has been our basic 
nature, visualizing oneself as a deity is not pretending to be what one is 
not and it is not attempting to change what one fundamentally is. Rather 
it is attempting to move towards a recognition of what has always been 
there, and through recognizing it, to reveal its qualities. 
In our present condition, buddha nature is obscured by various 
secondary or adventitious stains which are present in our minds—mental 
afflictions and cognitive obscurations—and these have to be removed 
in order to reveal our buddha nature. Now these can be removed gradually 
through the practice of meditation; yet it is much more effective to 
work with the actual mode of experience that we now undergo. 
Specifically, we experience at present a variety of impure appearances, 
what we could call internal impure appearances—the experience of 
kleshas and so forth within our minds—and external impure appearances. 
By viewing all of these as the pure world of the deity, gradually these 
impure appearances or projections can be removed. It is for that reason 
that we visualize the mandala and forms of these deities. 
In general our practice of dharma and our practice of meditation 
are concerned with the realization of emptiness (Skt. shunyata). Because 
of that, we may imagine that the ultimate result or the ultimate fruition 
of our practice is some kind of absolute nothingness. We may imagine 
that buddhahood is a state of absolutely nothing. But this is not the 
case. The state of buddhahood, which is the result of these spiritual 
paths, in as far as the actual experience of that Buddha is concerned— 
what is called the self-experience or self-appearance of that Buddha—is 
the dharmadhatu, which is utterly insubstantial, and in that sense is 
not an existing thing, but is at the same time the radiance of that Buddha's 
wisdom as it is experienced by that Buddha. So it is the experience of 
the dharmakaya, or otherwise put, the dharmadhatu. 
Now the radiance of that Buddha’s wisdom is also experienced by 
others, and the experiencing of that Buddha by others takes two principal 
forms. To those who have a pure mode of experience, such as 
bodhisattvas, the Buddha manifests as what are called pure bodies and 
wisdoms—as a pure or undiluted expression of that Buddha’s wisdom. 
50
The Tantric Path & Mahamudra 
So buddhahood is not nothing, because it is a radiant wisdom that 
manifests in the experience of others as well. 
To impure or ordinary beings, the Buddha manifests as 
nirmanakaya, as the body of emanation. So, fundamentally the modes 
of manifestation in the experience of others of a Buddha are the pure 
realms of the sambhogakaya, which are experienced by bodhisattvas and 
the impure realms of the nirmanakaya, which are experienced by 
thosewho are ordinary beings. What we are cultivating in the practice 
of the generation stage is the experience of the sambhogakaya realms. 
When we use the word “deity,” we think of something that is 
very, very good indeed that can help us—something that can give us 
something that we don’t have that that deity has and that we can get 
from that deity. This is not the Vajrayana view or use of the concept 
of deity. 
Any of the many deities used in Vajrayana meditation are used 
primarily to promote or bring out, through identification with them, 
qualities that are innate in us already. We merely use the technique of 
working with a deity to bring out or promote these qualities. For that 
reason, while we do sometimes visualize deities as separate from 
ourselves—for example, while we do sometimes visualize deities in front 
of us for the accumulation of merit and so on—our principal mode of 
visualizing deities is to visualize ourselves as these deities. 
This visualizing is done in a precise manner. It always begins 
with the recognition that our conventional mode of experience or 
appearances is the projection of our obscurations, our confusion, and 
therefore at the beginning we let go of all of this. We think that 
everything that we see and so forth subsides or dissolves into emptiness. 
Then from within the expanse of emptiness there will usually be the 
visualization of the mind of the deity arising in the form of either the 
seed syllable of that particular deity and/or possibly the sceptre, which 
represents that specific deity. Then gradually from that the practitioner 
will arise in the form of the deity’s body and when you arise in the 
form of this visualized deity, you think, “I am this deity.” If it is a 
guru sadhana, you think, “I am this particular guru;” if it is a yidam 
51
Teachings on the Practice of Meditation 
practice, you think, “I am this particular yidam;” if it is a dharmapala 
practice, you think, “I am this particular dharmapala.” 
Aside from the ultimate benefits of this kind of practice, which 
are the qualities of buddhahood, there are short-term benefits as well, 
and these ensue even with a relatively slight amount of practice. For 
example, a great deal of generation stage practice is concerned with 
actually visualizing various aspects of the deity’s appearance. You visualize 
the deity’s body in general, and in particular parts; the ornaments or 
jewellery, the clothes and so on. As you do this your mind is placed at 
rest on each of these specific points in turn and the placement of your 
mind at rest on these specific points of the visualization generates an 
excellent state of tranquillity. In particular, because you are engaged in 
a detailed visualization—for example you move from one detail to 
another of the deity’s physical appearance, the details of the jewellery 
and clothing, the sceptres held in the hands and so on—the inherent 
clarity of your mind is very much brought out and experienced. So the 
tranquillity that is generated, while it is a state of rest or tranquillity, 
has no torpor or sunkenness to it. 
Another aspect of some generation stage practices is what is called 
the radiation and withdrawal of light, or rays of light. This usually takes 
the form of brilliant rays of light shooting out from the seed syllable at 
the heart of the deity and then gradually being withdrawn back into it. 
Often this radiation and withdrawal of light is connected with actually 
benefiting beings. For example, when performing this phase of the 
meditation you may begin by considering all of the pain and suffering 
there is. Then you think that these rays of light fill the entire world and 
remove all of the physical pain, poverty, sickness, ignorance, emotional 
misery and so on, that afflict all beings. The colour of the rays of light 
will sometimes correspond to the colour of the deity, such as yellow, 
red, white or whatever. Sometimes it will be of five colours like a rainbow 
and so on. In any case, you think that through these rays of light you 
actually remove all the physical and mental suffering of beings, and 
through doing that, that you establish all beings in a state of long- 
lasting happiness. In that way, through this aspect of the generation 
52
The Tantric Path & Mahamudra 
stage you can also train your mind in the development of bodhichitta, 
and you can do so in such a way that you can actually start to instil in 
yourself a confidence that you can benefit beings. 
Also when you are performing this meditation of the radiation 
and withdrawal of light rays, you can think that the rays of light go to, 
or are projected to, all pure realms, and that on the end of each ray of 
light are innumerable excellent offerings which are presented to all the 
Buddhas and bodhisattvas who reside in these realms. So by means of 
this meditation you accumulate merit.” Then you can think that the 
rays of light which have drawn into themselves the blessings of all these 
Buddhas and bodhisattvas are withdrawn back into your heart, by means 
of which you actually receive their blessings.6 When you perform this 
meditation and generate the confidence that you have actually received 
the blessings of these various Buddhas and bodhisattvas, this produces 
a good experience of your mind and will very much enhance both the 
clarity and stability of either tranquillity or insight practice. 
Furthermore, the practice of the generation stage includes three 
fundamental elements, which are called clear appearance or clarity of 
appearance, stable pride and recollection of purity. The first of these, 
clarity of appearance, is the clear visualization of the form of the deity, 
and even this alone will somewhat weaken your fixation on a self. We 
constantly support or strengthen or reinforce our fixation on a self with 
thoughts of “my body,” “my mind,” and all those things with which we 
usually identify. Here you are somewhat counteracting that by visualizing 
yourself as a deity who is not who you normally regard yourself to be. 
Furthermore, the deity’s form is not conceived of as solid and substantial, 
but as vivid and yet utterly insubstantial; the unity of lucidity and 
emptiness, like a rainbow. This visualization alone will naturally slightly 
weaken the fixation on a self. 
When practicing visualizations you also sometimes reflect upon 
the second point, which is stable pride. Stable pride is the recognition 
that you are not inventing something, you are not visualizing 
something that is not already there inherently, and based on that, 
stable pride is the generation of the confidence, “I actually am this 
53
Teachings on the Practice of Meditation 
deity.” It is the confidence of being the deity and getting into the actual 
feeling of being the deity, rather than merely visualizing the deity as a 
static or dead image. 
In order to enhance the pride of being the deity, there exists the 
technique of invitation. From the three places—the forehead, throat 
and heart of the deity’s body—rays of white, red and blue light radiate 
and invite the actual deity from all the places where that deity might be 
found.’ Then this deity is brought in and dissolves into you. The reason 
for this technique is that you may have the attitude that you are 
visualizing yourself as the deity but that it is just a static image and that 
the deity is really somewhere else. If you have that attitude, then by 
doing this visualization you will become confident that this deity is 
actually within you and that the visualization is not merely a static 
image. This is a significant step in learning to transform the impure 
mode of perception into a pure one. 
The third technique when you are practicing the stage of 
generation is the recollection of purity, which is fundamentally the 
recollection that the deity’s form is not impure and substantial, that it is 
not made of flesh and blood. It is an utterly insubstantial and yet vivid 
embodiment of wisdom and it arises like a rainbow in the sky, as a 
spontaneous and insubstantial unity of vivid appearance and natural or 
inherent emptiness. 
Furthermore, in connection with this third technique there is 
the recognition that your mind, the mind of the practitioner, is the 
mind of the deity. Not only your body, but your mind is to be identified 
with the deity, which means that you let go of the thought that your 
mind consists of impure kleshas and nasty thoughts and so on. You 
simply generate the confidence that your mind is fundamentally the 
mind of the deity. Now if it is for example a guru practice, then you 
think, “my mind is the mind of this guru.” If it is a yidam, you think, 
“my mind is the mind of this yidam.” If it is a dharmapala, you think, 
“my mind is the mind of this dharmapala,” and this confidence is 
legitimate, because that is the nature of your mind. Recognizing that, 
you rest in that confidence. Resting in the confidence that your mind 
54
The Tantric Path & Mahamudra 
is the mind of the deity is a powerful way of enhancing your realization 
of insight. 
Now all of this is true about any deity practice, and which 
particular deity it is makes comparatively little difference in all of this. 
You could be meditating upon Chakrasamvara, you could be meditating 
upon Vajrayogini, you could be meditating upon Avalokiteshvara, you 
could be meditating upon Tara. In any case, what you are actually doing, 
the fundamental technique of identification with the visualization of 
the deity is the same. All of these different elements are, and should be, 
present in the practice. Whether the liturgy is elaborate or short, and 
whether the visualization is complicated or simple, does not change the 
basic process of the generation stage. 
In that way, then practice of the generation stage is really useful. 
It is followed by the practice of the completion stage. The completion 
stage consists, most fundamentally of tranquillity and insight. Now 
tranquillity is important, but eventually it has to be followed by the 
practice of insight. Insight depends, first of all, upon your devotion 
and your supplication.* Through repeated devoted supplication, there 
can occur a recognition of the nature of things, which is what we 
call insight. 
As far as actually practicing insight meditation, it is slightly distinct 
from the practice of tranquillity. First of all, the gaze is a little different. 
In tranquillity practice, you generally somewhat lower your gaze. In 
insight practice, you raise your gaze above the horizontal, so that you 
are looking slightly upward. The reason for this is that by doing so, you 
promote the lucidity of your mind, which is necessary for insight practice. 
The actual meditation begins with tranquillity practice. You allow your 
mind to come to rest in the state of tranquillity or stillness that you 
have cultivated through practicing tranquillity meditation. Then you 
look at it directly. You are not trying to analyse it or to examine it 
conceptually. You are trying to actually see it, see what it is like. You are 
trying to see what is at rest. How is it at rest; what does “at rest” mean? 
What is this stillness? Where is it at rest? Is it inside your body, outside 
your body? Is it somewhere in particular? And the way you look at this 
55
Teachings on the Practice of Meditation 
state of stillness, the way you look at your mind within stillness is almost 
like looking at something physically with your eyes, in the sense that it 
is a direct experience rather than an attempt to evaluate conceptually. 
When you look at your mind, or you look for your mind, you 
will not find anything there whatsoever. No matter how you look and 
no matter where you look, you won't find anything. Initially when not 
finding anything you are likely to think either, “Well, I’ve mistaken the 
manner of looking; I don’t know how to look; I’m looking in the wrong 
way; it’s there but I’m not seeing it.” Or you might think, “Well, I’m 
just not capable of looking at it; I don’t have what it takes to find the 
mind.” In fact, if you think these things, your thinking is incorrect. 
The reason you don’t see the mind and the reason you don’t find the 
mind is not that you don’t know how to look or that it is too subtle for 
you to find. The reason that you don’t find the mind is that there is 
nothing there. The mind exists nowhere. The mind abides nowhere. 
The mind has no substantial characteristics whatsoever. It is for this 
reason that we call the nature of the mind emptiness or dharmadhatu. 
Now, when we say dharmadhatu—which means the expanse or space of 
all things—what is being implied is that dharmadhatu is at the same 
time the nature of all things, not just the nature of the mind. 
However, practically speaking, the method is to look at this nature 
within the mind, because you can directly experience, right now, your 
mind’s emptiness simply by looking at it. It is much more difficult to 
experience the emptiness of all things, so therefore we use the mind as 
the technique for establishing this important understanding. 
When we say that the mind is empty, we do not mean that it is 
an absolute nothingness. If we simply say empty, then we might think 
that mind is like empty space, which is nothing whatsoever. Empty 
space is nothing whatsoever in the sense that empty space has no cognitive 
lucidity. Empty space has no intelligence, no awareness. Your mind is 
no “thing” whatsoever in the sense that it has no substantial 
characteristics, it has no substantial existence of any kind. Yet that 
nothingness, if you want to call it a nothingness, is at the same time 
lucid. In fact it is a cognitive lucidity, which is referred to as the unity or 
56
The Tantric Path & Mahamudra 
sameness of lucidity and emptiness. This is something that you can and 
will directly experience through looking at your mind. 
Earlier I described the eight consciousnesses and I said that it is 
the sixth consciousness, the mental consciousness, that meditates. I also 
said that the sixth consciousness is conceptual, which means that the 
sixth consciousness has the capacity to conceptualise. It also has the 
capacity to be non-conceptual. When you meditate, the sixth 
consciousness is outwardly directed and thinks about or conceptualises 
all sorts of things. But when the sixth consciousness is applied in this 
technique of meditation by turning in on itself and looking at itself, it 
looks at itself in a non-conceptual way, and it experiences its own 
emptiness, its own lucidity, directly, rather than through a veneer of 
conceptual estimation or evaluation. Now this mode of direct experience 
is called, in the language of valid cognition, or the traditional study of 
logic and cognition, “yogic direct valid cognition.” It is a direct 
experience, so therefore it is called a direct valid cognition. It is a type 
that occurs in practice, and therefore is called yogic direct valid cognition. 
So, even though this is performed by the sixth consciousness it is still a 
non-conceptual and direct experience. 
Now, some people study quite a bit. If you are one of those who 
has been studying quite a bit, or if you are one who may study quite a 
bit in the future, you may have, or will come into contact with references 
in the Buddhist tradition to the impossibility of the mind seeing itself. 
Specifically in Chandrakirti’s “Madhyamika Avatara,” and in Shantidevas 
“Bodhisattvacaryavatara’—and in the latter text specifically in the ninth 
chapter, the chapter on the perfection of wisdom—we find statements 
that the mind cannot see itself, and images and reasons for this statement 
are given. Here, what is being given in these texts is a refutation of 
substantialist schools who assert that a substantial mind can see its 
substantial self in the same way for example, that our physical eye actually 
sees something, a visual form, that appears to be out there. 
Now, while seeing this statement in Madhyamaka texts—that the 
mind cannot see itself—you may wonder if it contradicts the Mahamudra 
tradition’s injunction to allow your mind to look at itself. In fact it does 
57
Teachings on the Practice of Meditation 
not. Because what is being discussed in Chandrakirti’s and Shantideva’s 
writings is the substantialist notion that a substantial or truly existing 
mind can see itself as a substantially existent thing. So when the texts 
say that that is impossible, they are being completely accurate of course. 
But in this context of meditation practice, when we say that the mind 
looks at itself, or views its own nature, we're not talking about a mind 
that has substantial existence viewing itself and seeing or discovering its 
substantial existence and substantial characteristics. We are talking about 
a mind of which the fundamental nature is emptiness, and of which the 
primary characteristic is cognitive lucidity, looking at itself and seeing 
its own emptiness, and through being aware of that emptiness, 
recognizing its own cognitive lucidity, which is entirely different from a 
substantial thing seeing itself. 
Question: Rinpoche, you said that the completion stage consists of 
tranquillity and insight. When I’ve been doing my ngondro practice, I 
might start the practice session with shamatha—vipashyana practice. 
And in the vipashyana practice, I practice this kind of looking that 
youre describing. Then there’s the generation of the visualization, the 
recitation of the mantra, the dissolving of the visualization; and after 
that, what I remember being instructed in was keeping the gaze up and 
out, but resting your mind in the aftertaste of whatever the practice was. 
So, for example if it is the Vajrasattva mantra, resting in that purity; if it’s 
mandala, resting in the accumulation of merit and wisdom and so forth. 
So I’m curious about what to do in that space after doing the visualization. 
Also, is the term completion stage synonymous with insight and 
tranquillity? Is that just a Vajrayana term that we use to describe them? 
Rinpoche: Well, the practice of shamatha at the beginning of a session 
of generation stages is good because it relaxes your mind and enables 
you to perform the generation stage properly. The actual intention of a 
completion stage is the bringing of the mind to rest in a state of stable 
lucidity. This could be resting in the aftertaste of the previous generation 
stage experience, because that will have the elements of clarity and 
58
The Tantric Path & Mahamudra 
stability in it. Or it could be resting in the direct experience of the 
mind’s nature—whatever is appropriate for the specific practitioner. 
Mainly, when we say completion stage we are referring to insight, 
to lhaktong or vipashyana. But when beginners cannot recognize what 
is to be experienced or meditated upon in insight meditation, or they 
cannot rest in that long enough to actually practice it, then it is okay for 
them to do shamatha or tranquillity practice at that point, and gradually 
develop that into the completion stage. 
Question: Rinpoche, when we rest in a state of tranquillity and reflect 
on the mind, then what doesn’t seem to subside is a sense of locatedness 
to that lucidity, to the clarity of just sitting with eyes open. The experience 
of the visual world, sound and so on, all arise somewhere, or there’s a 
sense of it arising somewhere, which doesn’t fall away. What would be a 
further step? 
Rinpoche: In the beginning when we practice this we experience a lot 
of fixation. First of all it is important to recognize that the presence of 
the five sense consciousnesses, or the functioning of the five sense 
consciousnesses does not in itself, in any way impair or compromise 
your mind’s basic lucidity or clarity, because the five sense consciousnesses 
in themselves and your mode of experience based on them does not 
entail conceptual fixation in and of itself. However through habit it is 
normal for us to experience our clarity as somehow centred on this 
perspective, this point of view, this specific location. This need not be 
viewed as a threat to meditation practice; it is imply how you experience. 
But as you continue to work with the practice, the aspect of that 
experience that is in fact a conceptually imposed fixation, will loosen 
and will fall away. 
Question: Rinpoche, could you elaborate on the concept that insight 
depends on supplication and devotion? I’m also interested in anything 
Rinpoche has to say on the mechanism of transmission from guru 
to disciple. 
59
Teachings on the Practice of Meditation 
Rinpoche: Devotion is mainly confidence, and it refers here to the 
confidence that there will be a result from practicing this meditation. It 
is a confidence that these instructions, derived from this teacher, will 
lead to this result. And it is the certainty that therefore, the process is 
valid. If you lack this confidence, if you think, “I don’t know if this is 
really going to do me any good or lead to anything,” then you'll think, 
“What is the point in sitting still and staring off into space?” If you 
have no confidence in the instructions and the teacher who gives the 
instructions, then when they say to you, “Look at your mind, look at 
your mind,” you'll think, “Aah! What good will that do?” So as long as 
you take that attitude, that it’s probably not going to do any good, it 
probably is not going to do any good and no realization will come about. 
So for that reason, devotion, confidence, is very important. If you think, 
“Well, this person realized this by doing this and he’s taught me how to 
do this, so therefore I can realize this by doing this,” if you think that, 
then you will. The confidence will actually enable you to recognize your 
mind. So it is the confidence in the instructions and therefore, in your 
practice, and therefore, in the teacher who gives it. 
Transmission or pointing out is simply when a teacher knows 
exactly what to do, exactly what instructions to give, and the environment 
of the instructions and so on—exactly what to do to cause a particular 
student to recognize their mind’s nature. So the essence of transmission 
is appropriateness. 
Question: Rinpoche, you say that a substantial mind cannot look at 
itself and see any substantial mind. But you said that that is not 
contradictory with an insubstantial, lucid mind looking at itself and 
seeing lucid emptiness. I want to get this clear in my mind. Would you 
say that whatever it is that looks, that feels like a watcher, that has some 
kind of awareness, looking at your mind, one’s mind, and seeing that 
it’s empty, and recognizing that because it is empty, that’s what gives rise 
to the lucidity—would you say that it is the lucidity arising from that 
emptiness, therefore it sees that whatever is looking at it recognizes that 
whatever is looking is, because it’s lucid, empty? Does that make sense? 
60
The Tantric Path & Mahamudra 
Translator: If understood your question, it’s quite simple. Let me tell 
you what I asked him. When the mind that is the unity of lucidity and 
emptiness recognizes itself—that mind of lucidity and emptiness—is it 
the lucidity aspect that recognizes? 
Rinpoche: Yes. It is the aspect of clarity, of lucidity, that recognizes. 
But the lucidity mainly and initially recognizes the emptiness, by not 
experiencing anything. The cognitive lucidity, or we could simply say, 
the cognition, sees the emptiness, and through recognizing the 
emptiness, through there being recognition, recognizes that that 
emptiness is cognition. 
Question: Therefore if] had experienced this, I could think, “Because 
there is emptiness, and lucidity arises out of that emptiness, then this 
lucidity, which is looking at that emptiness, which I take to be a “me,” 
is actually empty. Because I see lucidity arising from emptiness, then 
this lucidity that sees it is empty.” 
Rinpoche: Well, following upon that recognition you would not take 
the lucidity to be a self, because the very recognition would have been 
the recognition of that lucidity’s emptiness or insubstantiality, which 
is also its non-selfness, its non-selfhood. Because our fixation on a 
self is based on the misapprehension of something existing, the 
recognition of nothing having substantial existence would contradict 
or contravene that. 
Question: Okay. So would you say that it would take this doing, 
recognizing that over and over again, to take away this misapprehension 
of selfhood, because we come right back to thinking, acting as if we are 
a self? 
Rinpoche: Yes. 
Student: Okay. Thank you very much. 
61
Teachings on the Practice of Meditation 
Question: Could you please explain what you meant by “torpid 
tranquillity?” My instinct says some kind of laziness or dullness. 
Translator: Dullness. The word torpor is like the word sleepy, or dull. 
Why don’t we ask Rinpoche to define the Tibetan word? 
Rinpoche: The fundamental meaning of the term “jingwa,” which 
literally means “sunkenness,” and comes from a verb which means “to 
sink,” like to sink into quicksand—the fundamental meaning of it is a 
mental state in which any clarity in your mind is sunk, and so there’s no 
manifest clarity at all, and the mind is very dull. Or torpid. 
Question: And could you say the Tibetan word?” 
Rinpoche: “Jingwa.” 
Translator: Rinpoche’s saying that the actual pronunciation will vary 
between areas. Some would say “jingwa,” some would say “singwa’ and 
some would say “shingwa,” all for the same word. 
  62
Notes 
* 1: gtum-mo in Tibetan, meaning fierce or wrathful and referring to a kind of 
2: Nw psychic heat generated and experienced through certain meditative 
practices of the Vajrayana. This heat serves to burn up all types of obstacles 
and confusion. Included in the Six Doctrines of Naropa, the Six Doctrines 
of Niguma, and the Six Doctrines of Sukhasiddhi. 
The diagram shows a monk chasing, binding, leading and pacifying an 
elephant whose colour changes from black to white. The elephant 
represents the mind and the black colour the gross aspect of mental 
dullness. The monkey represents agitation or distraction of the mind and 
its black colour, scattering. The hare represents the more subtle aspect of 
mental torpor. The hook and rope which the monk wields represents 
clear understanding and mindful recollection. The diminishing flame 
appearing at various stages represents the decreasing effort required for 
meditation. The objects of cloth, fruit, perfume, cymbals and mirror are 
the five sense objects representing the five sensual sources of distraction. 
At the end of the path the pure white elephant is the mind completely 
subdued and the attainment of single-pointed concentration. The flying 
monk represents physical bliss and riding the elephant mental bliss. Riding 
the elephant across the rainbow and wielding the sword of perfect insight 
having attained the flame of clear understanding and mindfulness 
represents the uprooting of samsara by the unity of insight and tranquility 
which directly realises emptiness. 
: See Thrangu Rinpoche’s The Five Buddha Families and Eight Consciousnesses 
(Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal Publications) for more details. 
A personal deity, the practice of which brings realization of the natural 
state —the true nature of mind and the true nature of reality 
: Merit is the positive karmic result of virtuous action. 
: Thrangu Rinpoche has said we should realize that what we are trying to do 
63
Teachings on the Practice of Meditation 
is open ourselves up to receive the blessings (Tib. chin lap) of the lineage. 
These blessings are always there and are the result of all the Buddhas and 
bodhisattvas wishing that all beings reach enlightenment. 
7: The deity will be found in her or his own pure land, in the mindstreams of 
all buddhas and bodhisattvas of the three times and ten directions, in the 
mindstreams of all the other sources of refuge, in the physical support 
into which the deity is dissolved at the end of any given practice, and of 
course, ultimately in the mindstream of the practitioner. 
8: i.e. devotion to and supplication of the guru. 
  64
Glossary of Terms 
ff, Abhidharma. (Tib. ché ngin pa) The Buddhist teachings are often divided 
into the Tripitaka: the sutras (teachings of the Buddha), the Vinaya 
(teachings on conduct,) and the Abhidharma which are the analyses of 
phenomena that exist primarily as a commentarial tradition to the Buddhist 
teachings. 
Afflicted consciousness. (Tib. nyén yid) The seventh consciousness. As used here 
it has two aspects: the immediate consciousness which monitors the other 
consciousnesses making them continuous and the klesha consciousness 
which is the continuous presence of self. (see consciousnesses, eight) 
Afflictive obscuration. There are two types of obscurations that cover one’s 
buddha nature. The obscuration of the afflictive or disturbing emotions 
and the obscuration of dualistic perception, or sometimes called the 
intellectual obscurations or cognitive obscurations. 
Alaya consciousness. (Tib. kiin shi nam she) According to the Cittamatra school 
this is the eighth consciousness and is often called the ground 
consciousness or store-house consciousness. 
Arhat. “Free from four maras.” The mara of conflicting emotions, the mara of 
the deva, the mara of death and the mara of the skandhas. The highest 
level of the Hinayana path. Arhat is male and arhati is female. 
Bodhichitta. (Tib. chang chup chi sem) Literally, the mind of enlightenment. 
There are two kinds of bodhichitta: absolute bodhichitta, which is 
completely awakened mind that sees the emptiness of phenomena, and 
relative bodhichitta which is the aspiration to practice the six paramitas 
and free all beings from the suffering of samsara. In regard to relative 
bodhichitta there is also two kinds: aspiration bodhichitta and perseverance 
bodhichitta. 
Bodhisattva. (Tib. chang chup sem pa) “Heroic mind.” Bodhi means blossomed 
or enlightened, and sattva means heroic mind. Literally, one who exhibits 
65
Teachings on the Practice of Meditation 
the mind of enlightenment. Also an individual who has committed him 
or herself to the Mahayana path of compassion and the practice of the six 
paramitas to achieve buddhahood to free all beings from samsara. These 
are the heart or mind disciples of the Buddha. 
Bodhisattva levels. (Skt. bhumi, Tib. sa) The levels or stages a bodhisattva goes 
through to reach enlightenment. These consist of ten levels in the sutra 
tradition and thirteen in the tantra tradition. 
Buddha. (Tib. sang gye) An individual who attains, or the attainment of, 
complete enlightenment, such as the historical Shakyamuni Buddha. 
Buddha Shakyamuni, (Tib. shakya tubpa) The Shakyamuni Buddha, often 
called the Gautama Buddha, refers to the fourth Buddha of this age, who 
lived between 563 and 483 BCE. 
Buddhafield. (Tib. sang gye kyi zhing) 1) One of the realms of the five Buddha 
families, either as sambhogakaya or nirmanakaya. 2) Pure personal 
experience. 
Buddhahood. (Tib. sang gyas) The perfect and complete enlightenment of 
dwelling in neither samsara nor nirvana. Expression of the realization of 
perfect enlightenment, which characterizes a Buddha. The attainment of 
buddhahood is the birthright of all beings. According to the teachings of 
Buddha, every sentient being has, or better is already, buddha nature; 
thus buddhahood cannot be “attained.” It is much more a matter of 
experiencing the primordial perfection and realizing it in everyday life. 
Buddha nature. (Tib. de shegs nying po) The essential nature of all sentient 
beings. The potential for enlightenment. 
Chakra. A complex systematic description of physical and psychological energy 
channels. 
Chakrasamvara. (Tib. korlo dompa) A meditational deity which belongs to the 
Anuttarayoga tantra set of teachings. A main yidam or tantra of the New 
Schools. 
Chandali. (Tib. tummo) A Vajrayana term for a kind of psychic heat generated 
and experienced through certain meditative practices. This heat serves to 
burn up all the types of obstacles and confusion. One of the six dharmas 
of Naropa. This technique should not be practiced without the guidance 
of a qualified instructor who has practiced this technique successfully 
him or herself. 
Chandrakirti. A seventh century Indian Buddhist scholar of the Madhyamaka 
school who is best known for founding the Prasangika subschool and 
writing two treatises on emptiness using logical reasoning. 
66
Glossary of Terms 
Channels, winds and essences. Nadi, prana and bindu; the constituents of the 
vajra body. These channels are not anatomical structures, but more like 
meridians in acupuncture. There are thousands of channels, but the three 
main channels that carry the subtle energy are the right, left and central 
channel. The central channel runs roughly along the spinal column while 
the right and left are on the sides of the central channel. 
According to the yogic teachings of the path of skilful means, realization 
is attained through synchronization of body and mind. This may be 
achieved through meditating on nadi (channels), prana (energy), and bindu 
(drops) — the psychic components in the illusory body. Prana is the energy, 
or “wind,” moving through the nadis. As is said, “Mind consciousness 
rides the horse of prana on the pathways of the nadis. The bindu is mind’s 
nourishment.” 
Because of dualistic thinking, prana enters the left and right channels. 
This divergence of energy in the illusory body corresponds to the mental 
activity that falsely distinguishes between subject and object and leads to 
karmically determined activity. Through yogic practice, the pranas can 
be brought into the central channel and therefore transformed into 
wisdom-prana. Then the mind can recognize its fundamental nature, 
realizing all dharmas as unborn. 
This belongs to advanced practice and can only be learned through 
direct oral transmission from an accomplished guru. Once the meditator 
is well established in the experience of the fundamental nature of mind, 
they can meditate on it directly, dissolving the nadi, prana, and bindu 
visualization. Meditation using the concept of psychic channels is regarded 
as being the completion stage with signs, and the formless practice which 
contemplates the nature of mind directly is the completion stage without 
signs. 
Chenrezig. (Skt. Avalokiteshvara) The bodhisattva embodying the compassion 
of all the Buddhas. Depicted holding the wish-fulfilling gem between 
folded hands. One of the eight main bodhisattvas. The mantra associated 
with this bodhisattva is known as the king of mantras, OM MANI PEME 
HUNG. 
Chod. (Tib.) This is pronounced “ché” and literally means “to cut off” and 
refers to a practice that is designed to cut off all ego involvement and 
defilements. The mo chod (female chod) practice was founded by the 
famous female saint Machig Labdron (1031 to 1129 C. E.). 
Clarity, (Tib. selwa) Also translated as luminosity. The nature of mind is that 
67
Teachings on the Practice of Meditation 
it is empty of inherent existence, but the mind is not just voidness or 
completely empty because it has this clarity which is awareness or the 
knowing of mind. So clarity is a characteristic of emptiness (shunyata) of 
mind. 
Co-emergent wisdom. (Skt. sahajajnana, Tib. lhen chik kye pay yeshe) The 
advanced realization of the inseparability of samsara and nirvana and how 
these arise simultaneously and together. 
Cognitive obscuration. There are two types of obscurations that cover one’s 
buddha nature. The obscuration of the afflictive or disturbing emotions 
and the obscuration of dualistic perception, or sometimes called the 
intellectual obscurations or cognitive obscurations. The cognitive 
obscuration is the subtle obscuration of holding onto the concepts of 
subject, object and action. 
Completion stage. (Tib. dzo rim) In the Vajrayana there are two stages of 
meditation: the creation/development stage and the completion stage. 
Completion stage with marks is the six doctrines. Completion stage 
without marks is the practice of essence Mahamudra, resting in the 
unfabricated nature of mind. 
Conditioned existence. (Skt. samsara, Tib. khor wa) Ordinary existence which 
contains suffering because one still possesses attachment, aggression, and 
ignorance. It is contrasted to liberation or nirvana. 
Daka. (Tib. khandro) A male counterpart to a dakini. 
Dakini. (Tib. khandroma) A yogini who has attained high realizations of the 
fully enlightened mind. She may be a human being who has achieved 
such attainments or a non-human manifestation of the enlightened mind 
of a meditational deity. A female aspect of the protectors. It is feminine 
energy which has inner, outer and secret meanings. 
Definitive meaning. The Buddha’s teachings that state the direct meaning of 
dharma. They are not changed or simplified for the capacity of the listener, 
in contrast to the provisional meaning. 
Desire realm. Comprises the six realms of gods, demi-gods, humans, animals, 
hungry spirits and hell-beings. 
Dharma. (Tib. ché) This has two main meanings: first, any truth, such as that 
the sky is blue; and secondly, the teachings of the Buddha (also called 
“Buddha-dharma’). 
Dharmadhatu. (Tib. ché ying) The all-encompassing space, unoriginated and 
without beginning, out of which all phenomena arises. The Sanskrit means 
“the essence of phenomena” and the Tibetan means “the expanse of 
68
Glossary of Terms 
phenomena,” but it usually refers to the emptiness that is the essence of 
phenomena. 
Dharmakaya. (Tib. ché ku) One of the three bodies of buddhahood. It is 
enlightenment itself, that is, wisdom beyond any point of reference. (see 
kayas, three.) 
Dharmapala. (Tib. cho kyong) Dharma protector. A Buddha, bodhisattva or 
powerful but ordinary being whose job is to remove all interferences and 
bestow all necessary conditions for the practice of pure dharma. 
Dharmata. (Tib. ché nyi) Dharmata is often translated as “suchness” or “the 
true nature of things” or “things as they are.” It is phenomena as it really 
is or as seen by a completely enlightened being without any distortion or 
obscuration, so one can say it is “reality.” 
Disturbing emotions. (Skt. klesha, Tib. nyén mong) Also called the “afflictive 
emotions,” these are the emotional afflictions or obscurations (in contrast 
to intellectual obscurations) that disturb the clarity of perception. These 
are also translated as “poisons.” They include any emotion that disturbs 
or distorts consciousness. The main kleshas are desire, anger and ignorance. 
Dzogchen. (Skt. mahasandhi)Literally “the great perfection” The teachings 
beyond the vehicles of causation, first taught in the human world by the 
great vidyadhara Garab Dorje. 
Egolessness. (Tib. dag me) Also called selflessness. There are two kinds of 
egolessness — the egolessness of other, that is, the emptiness of external 
phenomena and the egolessness of self, that is, the emptiness of a personal 
self. 
Egolessness or selflessness of person. (Skt. pudgalanairatmya) This doctrine asserts 
that when one examines or looks for the person, one finds that it is empty 
and without self. The person does not possess a self (Skt. atman, Tib. 
bdag-nyid) as an independent or substantial self. This position is held by 
most Buddhist schools. 
Egolesseness or selflessness of phenomena. (Skt. dharma-nairatmya) This doctrine 
asserts than not only is there selflessness of the person, but when one 
examines outer phenomena, one finds that external phenomena are also 
empty, i.e. it does not have an independent or substantial nature. This 
position is not held by the Hinayana schools, but is put forth by the 
Mahayana schools, particularly the Cittamatra school. 
Eight consciousnesses. The all-ground consciousness, mind-consciousness, 
afflicted consciousness, and the five sense-consciousnesses. The Hinayana 
sutras generally discuss mind in terms of six consciousnesses, namely, the 
69
Teachings on the Practice of Meditation 
five sensory consciousnesses and the sixth mental consciousness. The 
Mahayana Cittamatra school (Mind-only) school talks about the eight 
consciousness in which the first six are the same but has the seventh and 
eighth consciousnesses added. In the Hinayana tradition the functions of 
the seventh and eighth consciousness are subsumed in the sixth mental 
consciousness. 
Eight fold noble path. Right view, right thought, right speech, right action, 
right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness and right concentration. 
Eight freedoms & ten opportunities. (Tal jor) Tal is often translated as “freedom” 
and jor as “endowments,” “qualities,” “resources,” and “opportunities” 
which constitute a precious human birth to practice dharma. The eight 
freedoms are traditionally enumerated as freedom from birth as a hell 
being, a hungry ghost, an animal, a barbarian, a long-lived god, a heretic, 
a mentally handicapped person, or living in a dark age (here meaning 
when no Buddha has come, in other contexts, according to the teachings 
on five degenerations we are living in a dark age). Of the ten conjunctions 
or resources, the five personal conjunctions are having a human body, 
being born in a land to which the dharma has spread, having all of one’s 
senses intact, not reverting to evil ways, and having confidence in the 
three jewels. (Having one’s senses impaired to the extent that one’s mind 
could not function properly in the study and practice of dharma would 
constitute the loss of one’s precious human birth.) The five conjunctions 
that come by way of others are that a Buddha has been born in this age, 
that the Buddha taught the dharma, that the dharma still exists, that 
there are still followers who have realized the meaning and essence of the 
teachings of the dharma, and there are benevolent sponsors. 
Eight worldly concerns. (Tib. jik ten ché gysh) These keep one from the path; 
they are attachment to gain, attachment to pleasure, attachment to praise, 
attachment to fame, aversion to loss, aversion to pain, aversion to blame 
and aversion to a bad reputation. 
Emptiness. (Skt. shunyata, Tib. tong pa nyi) Also translated as voidness. The 
Buddha taught in the second turning of the wheel of dharma that external 
phenomena and the internal phenomena or concept of self or “I” have no 
real existence and therefore are “empty.” 
Enlightenment. (Tib. jang chub) The definition varies according to the Buddhist 
tradition, usually the same as buddhahood. The Hinayana tradition defines 
liberation as the freedom from rebirth in samsara, with mind free of 
ignorance and emotional conflict. The Mahayana tradition holds that 
70
Glossary of Terms 
enlightenment is not complete without development of compassion and 
commitment to use skilful means to liberate all sentient beings. In the 
Vajrayana teachings, the foregoing stages of enlightenment are necessary, 
but ultimate enlightenment is a thorough purification of ego and concepts. 
The final fruition of complete liberation transcends all duality and 
conceptualization. 
Eternalism. (Tib. rtag lta) The belief that there is a permanent and causeless 
creator of everything; in particular, that one’s identity or consciousness 
has a concrete essence which is independent, everlasting and singular. 
Father tantra. (Tib. pha gyu) There are three kinds of tantras. The father tantra 
is concerned with transforming aggression, the mother tantra with 
transforming passion, and the non-dual tantra with transforming 
ignorance, 
Five Buddha families. (Tib. rig nga) These are the Buddha, Vajra, Ratna, Padma 
and Karma families. 
Five male Buddhas. Vairochana, Akshobhya, Ratnasambhava, Amitabha and 
Amoghasiddhi 
Five female Buddhas. Dhatvishvari, Mamaki, Locana, Pandaravasini and 
Samayatara. 
Five dhyani Buddhas. Vairochana, Akshobhya, Ratnasambhava, Amitabha and 
Amoghasiddhi. They are the pure aspects of the five elements and five 
emotions. 
Five paths. (Tib. lam nga) According to the sutras there are five paths; the 
path of accumulation, the path of integration/junction, the path of seeing/ 
insight, (attainment of the first bodhisattva level), the path of meditation, 
and the path of no more learning (buddhahood). The five paths cover the 
entire process from beginning dharma practice to complete enlightenment. 
Five poisons. (Tib. dug nga) Temporary mental states that inhibit understanding: 
ignorance, pride, anger, desire, and jealousy. The three root poisons are 
ignorance, desire and anger. 
Five wisdoms. The dharmadhatu wisdom, mirror-like wisdom, wisdom of 
equality, discriminating wisdom and all-accomplishing wisdom. They 
should not be understood as separate entities but rather as different 
functions of one’s enlightened essence. 
Form realm. God realms of subtle form. 
Formless realm. (Tib. zug med kyi kham) The abode of an unenlightened being 
who has practiced the four absorptions of: infinite space, infinite 
71
Teachings on the Practice of Meditation 
consciousness, nothing whatsoever, and neither presence nor absence (of 
conception). 
Four foundations of meditation. (Tib. tun mong gi ngon dro shi) These are the 
four thoughts that turn the mind toward dharma. They are reflection on 
precious human birth, impermanence and the inevitability of death, karma 
and its effects, and the pervasiveness of suffering in samsara. 
Four immeasurables. Love, compassion, emphatic joy, and impartiality. 
Four noble truths. (Tib. pak pay den pa shi) The Buddha began teaching with a 
talk in India at Saranath on the four noble truths. These are the truth of 
suffering, the truth of the cause of suffering, the cessation of suffering, 
and the path. These truths are the foundation of Buddhism, particularly 
the Theravadin path. 
Four Preliminaries. Refers to the four general preliminaries which are the four 
thoughts that turn the mind and the four special preliminaries which are 
the four practices of prostrations, Vajrasattva recitation, mandala offering 
and guru yoga. 
Four seals. The four main principles of Buddhism: all compounded phenomena 
are impermanent, everything defiled (with ego-clinging) is suffering, all 
phenomena are empty and devoid of a self-entity, and nirvana is perfect 
peace. 
Four truths. The Buddha's first teachings. 1) All conditioned life is suffering. 
2) All suffering is caused by ignorance. 3) Suffering can cease. 4) The 
eight-fold path leads to the end of suffering: right understanding, thought, 
speech, action, livelihood, effort, mindfulness and meditation. 
Generation stage. (Skt. utpattikrama, Tib. che rim) In the Vajrayana there are 
two stages of meditation: the development and the completion stage. 
The creation stage is a method of tantric meditation that involves the 
visualization and contemplation of deities for the purpose of purifying 
habitual tendencies and realizing the purity of all phenomena. In this 
stage visualization of the deity is established and maintained. 
Graded path. This refers to being guided through the path to enlightenment 
through the three principle paths, 1) renunciation, 2) enlightened motive 
of bodhicitta, 3) and a correct understanding of emptiness (wisdom ). 
Guru. (Tib. lama) A teacher in the Tibetan tradition who has reached 
realization. 
Guru yoga. (Tib. lamay naljor) A practice of devotion to the guru culminating 
in receiving his blessing and blending indivisibly with his mind. Also 
refers to the fourth practice of the preliminary practices of ngéndro. 
72
Glossary of Terms 
Hearing lineage. (Tib. nyan gyu) A lineage of instruction passed orally from 
teacher to disciple. Teachings of a hearing lineage are usually very secret, 
since they can only be received by direct, personal communication with 
the guru. “Hearing lineage” is also a common epithet for the Kagyu lineage. 
Higher realms. The three higher realms are birth as a human, demi-god and 
god. 
Hinayana. (Tib. tek pa chung wa) Literally, the “lesser vehicle.” The first of 
the three yanas, or vehicles. The term refers to the first teachings of the 
Buddha, which emphasized the careful examination of mind and its 
confusion. It is the foundation of Buddha's teachings focusing mainly on 
the four truths and the twelve interdependent links. The fruit is liberation 
for oneself. 
Insight meditation. (Skt. Vipashyana, Tib. hak tong) This meditation develops 
insight into the nature of reality (Skt. dharmata). One of the two main 
aspects of meditation practice, the other being shamatha. 
Interdependent origination. The twelve links of causal connections which binds 
beings to samsaric existence and thus perpetuate suffering: ignorance, 
karmic formation, consciousness, name and form, the six sense bases, 
contact, sensation, craving, grasping, becoming, rebirth, old age, and 
death. These twelve links are like an uninterrupted vicious circle, a wheel 
that spins all sentient beings around and around through the realms of 
samsara. 
Jnana. (Tib. yeshe) Enlightened wisdom that is beyond dualistic thought. 
Kanjur. The preserved collection of the direct teaching of the Buddha. 
Kagyu (Tib.) Ka means oral and gyu means lineage; The lineage of oral 
transmission. One of the four major schools of Buddhism in Tibet. It was 
founded in Tibet by Marpa and is headed by His Holiness Karmapa. The 
other three are the Nyingma, the Sakya and the Gelugpa schools. 
Karma. (Tib. Jay) Literally “action.” The unerring law of cause and effect, eg. 
Positive actions bring happiness and negative actions bring suffering. The 
actions of each sentient being are the causes that create the conditions for 
rebirth and the circumstances in that lifetime. 
Karma Kagyu. (Tib.) One of the eight schools of the Kagyu lineage of Tibetan 
Buddhism which is headed by His Holiness Karmapa. 
Karmapa. The name means Buddha activities. The Karmapas are the head of 
the Kagyu school of Buddhism and were the first to implement the 
tradition of incarnate lamas. Karmapas are thought to be an emanation 
of the bodhisattva Avalokiteshvara. 
73
Teachings on the Practice of Meditation 
Karmic latencies or imprints. (Skt. vasana, Tib. pakchak) Every action and that 
a person does has an imprint which is stored in the eighth consciousness. 
These latencies express themselves later by leaving the eighth consciousness 
and entering the sixth consciousness upon being stimulated by external 
experience. 
Kayas, three. (Tib. ku sum) There are three bodies of the Buddha: the 
nirmanakaya, sambhogakaya and dharmakaya. The dharmakaya, also called 
the “truth body,” is the complete enlightenment or the complete wisdom 
of the Buddha that is unoriginated wisdom beyond form and manifests 
in the sambhogakaya and the nirmanakaya. The sambhogakaya, also called 
the “enjoyment body,” manifests only to bodhisattvas. The nirmanakaya, 
also called the “emanation body,” manifests in the world and in this context 
manifests as the Shakyamuni Buddha. The fourth kaya is the 
svabhavakakaya, the “essence body” which is the unity of the other three. 
Key instructions — a text’s key instruction rests upon establishing the line of 
reasoning in a teaching. Seeing this line of reasoning, we can distinguish 
between the form and the content of the teachings. What key instructions 
do are wake a person up to the true nature of the experience that the 
teachings generate, such as the dissolving of the objective form of the 
experience, which can be seen as it truly is, appreciated as having no 
independent reality and hence no power, as would be the case if it existed 
independently. The key instruction that, if acted upon, generates a 
liberating personality transformation, is repeated at each level of the 
teachings. 
Klesha. (Tib. nyén mong) Also called the “afflictive emotions,” these are the 
emotional afflictions or obscurations (in contrast to intellectual 
obscurations) that disturb the clarity of perception. These are also 
translated as “poisons.” They include any emotion that disturbs or distorts 
consciousness. The three main kleshas are desire, anger and ignorance. 
The five kleshas are the three above plus pride and envy/jealousy. 
Lama. (Skt. guru) La nobody above himself or herself in spiritual experience 
and ma expressing compassion like a mother. Thus the union of wisdom 
and compassion, feminine and masculine qualities. Lama is also a title 
given to a practitioner who has completed some extended training. 
Liberation. (see enlightenment) 
Lojong. Mind Training. The Mahayana meditation system of the early Kadampa 
school, brought to Tibet by Atisha. 
74
Glossary of Terms 
Lower realm. The three lower realms are birth as a hell being, hungry ghost 
and animal. 
Luminosity. (Tib. selwa) In the third turning of the wheel of dharma, the 
Buddha taught that everything is void, but this voidness is not completely 
empty because it has luminosity. Luminosity or clarity allows all 
phenomena to appear and is a characteristic of and inseparable from 
emptiness (Skt. shunyata). 
Madhyamaka. (Tib. u ma) The most influential of the four schools of Indian 
Buddhism founded by Nagarjuna in the second century C.E. The name 
comes from the Sanskrit word meaning “the Middle-way” meaning it is 
the middle way between eternalism and nihilism. The main postulate of 
this school is that all phenomena — both internal mental events and 
external physical objects — are empty of any true nature. The school uses 
extensive rational reasoning to establish the emptiness of phenomena. 
This school does, however, hold that phenomena do exist on the 
conventional or relative level of reality. 
Mahamudra. (Tib. cha ja chen po) Literally means “great seal” or “great symbol” 
meaning that all phenomena are sealed by the primordially perfect true 
nature. This form of meditation is traced back to Saraha (10th century) 
and was passed down in the Kagyu school through Marpa. This meditative 
transmission emphasizes perceiving mind directly rather than through 
rational analysis. It also refers to the experience of the practitioner where 
one attains the union of emptiness and luminosity and also perceives the 
non-duality of the phenomenal world and emptiness; also the name of 
Kagyupa lineage. 
Mahapandita. (Tib. pan di ta chen po) Maha means great and pandita Buddhist 
scholar. 
Mahasiddha. (Tib. drup thop chen po) A practitioner who has a great deal of 
realization. Maha means great and siddha refers to an accomplished 
practitioner. These were particularly Vajrayana practitioners who lived in 
India between the eight and twelfth century and practiced tantra. The 
biography of some of the most famous is found in The Eighty-four 
Mahasiddhas. 
Mahayana. (Tib. tek pa chen po) Literally, the “Great Vehicle.” These are the 
teachings of the second turning of the wheel of dharma, which emphasize 
shunyata (see shunyata), compassion and universal buddha nature. The 
purpose of enlightenment is to liberate all sentient beings from suffering 
as well as oneself. Mahayana schools of philosophy appeared several 
75
Teachings on the Practice of Meditation 
hundred years after the Buddha’s death, although the tradition is traced 
to a teaching he is said to have given at Rajgriha, or Vulture Peak Mountain. 
Mandala. (Tib. chil kor) Literally “centre and surrounding” but has different 
contexts. A diagram used in various Vajrayana practices that usually has a 
central deity and four directions. 
Mantra. (Tib. ngags) 1) A synonym for Vajrayana. 2) A particular combination 
of sounds symbolizing the nature of a deity, for example OM MANI 
PEME HUNG (Tib. ngak). These are invocations to various meditation 
deities which are recited in Sanskrit. These Sanskrit syllables, representing 
various energies, are repeated in different Vajrayana practices. 
Mantra vehicle. Another term for the Vajrayana. 
Mara. (Tib. du) Difficulties encountered by the practitioner. The Tibetan 
word means heavy or thick. In Buddhism mara symbolizes the passions 
that overwhelm human beings as well as everything that hinders the arising 
of wholesome roots and progress on the path to enlightenment. There are 
four kinds: skandha-mara, which is incorrect view of self; klesha-mara, 
which is being overpowered by negative emotions; matyu-mara, which is 
death and interrupts spiritual practice; and devaputra-mara, which is 
becoming stuck in the bliss that comes from meditation. 
Marpa. (1012-1097 C.E.) Marpa was known for being a Tibetan who made 
three trips to India and brought back many tantric texts, including the 
Six Yogas of Naropa, the Guhyasamaja, and the Chakrasamvara practices. 
His root teacher was Tilopa, the founder of the Kagyu lineage and the 
teacher of Naropa. Marpa initiated and founded the Kagyu lineage in 
Tibet. 
Mental consciousness. (Tib. yid kyi namshe) The sixth consciousness is the faculty 
of thinking which produces thoughts based upon the experiences of the 
five sense consciousnesses or its own previous content. (see eight 
consciousnesses). 
Mental factors. (Tib. sem yung) Mental factors are contrasted to mind in that 
they are more long-term propensities of mind including eleven virtuous 
factors such as faith, detachment, and equanimity, and the six root 
defilements such as desire, anger, and pride, and the twenty secondary 
defilements such as resentment, dishonesty, harmfulness. 
Middle-way. (Tib. u ma) or Madhyamaka school. A philosophical school 
founded by Nagarjuna and based on the Prajnaparamita sutras of 
emptiness. 
76
Glossary of Terms 
Milarepa. (1040-1123 C.E.) Milarepa was a student of Marpa who attained 
enlightenment in one lifetime. Mila, named by the deities and repa means 
white cotton. His student Gampopa established the (Dagpo) Kagyu lineage 
in Tibet. 
Mind-only school. Also called Cittamatra school. This is one of the major schools 
in the Mahayana tradition founded in the fourth century by Asanga that 
emphasized everything is mental events. 
Mudra. (Tib. chak gya) In this book it is a “hand seal” or gesture that is 
performed in specific tantric rituals to symbolize certain aspects of the 
practice being done. Also can mean spiritual consort, or the “bodily form” 
of a deity. 
Nadi. The channels in the vajra body through which the winds flow. 
Nihilism. (Tib. chad lta) Literally, “the view of discontinuance.” The extreme 
view of nothingness: no rebirth or karmic effects, and the non-existence 
of a mind after death. 
Nirmanakaya. (Tib. tulku) There are three bodies of the Buddha and the 
nirmanakaya or “emanation body” manifests in the world and in this 
context manifests as the Shakyamuni Buddha. (see kayas, three.) 
Nirvana. (Tib. nyangde) Literally, “extinguished.” Individuals live in samsara 
and with spiritual practice can attain a state of enlightenment in which 
all false ideas and conflicting emotions have been extinguished. This is 
called nirvana. The nirvana of a Hinayana practitioner is freedom from 
cyclic existence, an arhat. The nirvana of a Mahayana practitioner is 
buddhahood, free from extremes of dwelling in either samsara or the 
perfect peace of an arhat. 
Obscurations. There are two categories of obscurations or defilements that 
cover one’s buddha nature: the defilement of conflicting emotions (see 
five poisons & afflictive obscurations) and the defilement of latent tendencies 
or sometimes called the obscuration of dualistic perception, or the 
intellectual/cognitive obscurations (see cognitive obscurations). The first 
category prevents sentient beings from freeing themselves from samsara, 
while the second prevents them from gaining accurate knowledge and 
realising truth. 
Padmasambhava. (Tib. Guru Rinpoche) Or the “Lotus Born.” The great 8" 
century Indian mahasiddha who came to Tibet taming all the negative 
elemental forces and spreading the Buddhadharma. In particular he taught 
many tantras and Vajrayana practices, and concealed many texts to be 
later revealed by his disciples. 
77
Teachings on the Practice of Meditation 
Pandita. A great scholar. 
Paramita. “Transcendental” or “Perfection.” Pure actions free from dualistic 
concepts that liberate sentient beings from samsara. The six paramitas 
are: diligence, patience, morality, generosity, contemplation, and 
transcendental knowledge or insight. 
Paranirvana. After the Buddha Shakyamuni passed from this realm: Buddhas 
are not said to have died, since they have reached the stage of deathlessness, 
or deathless awareness. 
Prana. Life supporting energy. The “winds” or energy-currents of the vajra 
body. 
Prajna. (Tib. she rab) In Sanskrit it means “perfect knowledge” and can mean 
wisdom, understanding or discrimination. Usually it means the wisdom 
of seeing things from a high (e.g. non-dualistic) point of view. 
Pratyekabuddha. “Solitary Awakened One.” These are the body disciples of 
the Buddha. One who has attained awakening for himself, and on his 
own, with no teacher in that life. Generally placed on a level between 
arhat and Buddha. It is the fruition of the second level of the Hinayana 
path through contemplation on the twelve interdependent links in reverse 
order. 
Provisional meaning. The teachings of the Buddha which have been simplified 
or modified to the capabilities of the audience. This contrasts with the 
definitive meaning. , 
Rebirth. Continuous, cyclic rebirth into the realm of samsara. Consciousness 
of an individual enters form according to his or her karma, the causes and 
conditions created by previous actions. 
Relative truth. (Tib. kunsop) There are two truths: relative and absolute or 
ultimate truth. Relative truth is the perception of an ordinary 
(unenlightened) being who sees the world with all his or her projections 
based on the false belief in “I” and “other.” 
Root lama. (Tib. tsa way lama) A practitioner of Vajrayana can have several 
types of root guru: the vajra master who confers empowerment, who 
bestows reading transmission, or who explains the meaning of the tantras. 
The ultimate root guru is the master who gives the “pointing out 
instructions” so that one recognizes the nature of mind. 
Rupakaya. (Tib. zuk kyi ku) The form bodies that encompass the sambhogakaya 
and the nirmanakaya. 
Sadhana. (Tib. drup tap) Tantric liturgy and procedure for practice, usually 
emphasizing the generation stage. 
78
Glossary of Terms 
Samadhi. (Tib. tin ne zin) A state of meditation that is non-dualistic. There is 
an absence of discrimination between self and other. Also called meditative 
absorption or one-pointed meditation; this is the highest form of 
meditation. 
Samaya. (Tib. dam sig) The vows or commitments made in the Vajrayana to a 
teacher or to a practice. Many details exist but essentially it consists of 
outwardly, maintaining a harmonious relationship with the vajra master 
and one’s dharma friends and inwardly, not straying from the continuity 
of the practice. 
Sambhogakaya. (Tib. long ché dzok ku) There are three bodies of the Buddha 
and the sambhogakaya, also called the “enjoyment body,” is a realm of 
the dharmakaya that only manifests to bodhisattvas (see Aayas, three). 
Samsara. (Tib. kor wa) “Cyclic existence.” The conditioned existence of ordinary 
life in which suffering occurs because one still possesses attachment, 
aggression and ignorance. It is contrasted to nirvana. Through the force 
of karma motivated by ignorance, desire and anger one is forced to take 
on the impure aggregates and circle the wheel of existence until liberation. 
Samskaras. Skt. Mental formations, the fourth asggregate. See skhandha. 
Sangha. (Tib. gen dun) “Virtuous One.” Sang means intention or motivation 
and gha means virtuous. One with virtuous motivation. One of the three 
jewels. Generally refers to the followers of Buddhism, and more specifically 
to the community of monks and nuns. The exalted sangha is those who 
have attained a certain level of realization of the Buddha's teachings. 
Secret mantra. (Tib. sang ngak) A name for the Vajrayana. 
Selflessness. (Tib. dag me) Also called egolessness. In two of the Hinayana schools 
(Vaibhashika and Sautrantika) this referred exclusively to the fact that “a 
person” is not a real permanent self, but rather just a collection of thoughts 
and feelings. In two of the Mahayana schools (Cittamatra and 
Madhyamaka) this was extended to mean there was no inherent existence 
to outside phenomena as well. 
Sentient beings. With consciousness, an animated being as opposed to an 
inanimate object. All beings with consciousness or mind who have not 
attained the liberation of buddhahood. This includes those individuals 
caught in the sufferings of samsara as well as those who have attained the 
levels of a bodhisattva. 
Seven limbs of awakening. The virtue of faith, insight, samadhi, joy, diligence, 
mindfulness, and equanimity. Externally they are represented by the seven 
articles of royalty. 
79
Teachings on the Practice of Meditation 
Seven dharmas of Vairochana. These are the main positions of posture for 
meditation: (1) Straighten the upper body and the spinal column, (2) 
Look slightly downward into space straight across from the tip of the 
nose while keeping the chin and neck straight, (3) Straighten the shoulder 
blades in the manner of a vulture flexing its wings, (4) Keep the lips 
touching gently, (5) Let the tip of the tongue touch the upper palate, (6) 
Form the legs into either the lotus (Skt. padmasana) or the diamond (Skt. 
vajrasana) posture, and (7) Keep the back of the right hand flat on the 
left open palm with the inside of the tips of the thumbs gently touching. 
Shantideva. A great bodhisattva of classical India, author of the 
Bodhicharyavatara: The Guide to the Bodhisattvas Way of Life. - (late 7" 
century - mid 8" century CE.) 
Shastra. (Tib. tan ché) The Buddhist teachings are divided into words of the 
Buddha (the sutras) and the commentaries of others on his works the 
(shastras). 
Shravaka. “Hearer” corresponds to the level of arhat, those that seek and attain 
liberation for oneself through listening to the Buddhas teaching and 
gaining insight into selflessness and the four truths. These are the Buddhas 
speech disciples. 
Siddha. (Tib. drup top) An accomplished Buddhist practitioner. 
Siddhi. (Tib. ngodrup) “Accomplishment.” The spiritual accomplishments of 
accomplished practitioners. Usually refers to the “supreme siddhi” of 
complete enlightenment, but can also mean the “common siddhis,” eight 
mundane accomplishments. 
Six realms. The realms of the six classes of beings: gods, demigods, humans, 
animals, hungry ghosts and hell beings. 
Skandha. (Tib. pung pa) Literally “heaps.” These are the five basic 
transformations that perceptions undergo when an object is perceived: 
form, feeling, perception, formation and consciousness. First is form, 
which includes all sounds, smells, etc.; everything we usually think of as 
outside the mind. The second and third are sensations (pleasant and 
unpleasant, etc.) and their identification. Fourth is mental events, which 
include the second and third aggregates. The fifth is ordinary 
consciousness, such as the sensory and mental consciousnesses. 
Skilful means. Ingenuity in application. 
Spiritual song. (Skt. doha, Tib. gur) A religious song spontaneously composed 
by a Vajrayana practitioner. It usually has nine syllables per line. 
80
Glossary of Terms 
Stupa. (Tib. chorten) Objects of offering, or objects for accumulating. A stupa 
is a monument symbolic of the dharmakaya and contains the relics of 
Buddhas or other enlightened beings. These, like your Guru, are focal 
points for veneration and our path to buddhahood. Any disrespectful act 
toward them is disrespect for enlightenment itself. 
Supreme siddhi. Another word for enlightenment. 
Sutra. (Tib. do) Literally “Junction.” The combination of the Hinayana and 
Mahayana, or the combination of wisdom and compassion. Texts in the 
Buddhist cannon attributed to the Buddha. They are viewed as his recorded 
words, although they were not actually written down until many years 
after his paranirvana. They are usually in the form of dialogues between 
the Buddha and his disciples. These are often contrasted with the tantras 
which are the Buddha’s Vajrayana teachings and the shastras which are 
commentaries on the words of the Buddha. 
Sutra Mahamudra. (Tib. mdoit phyag chen) The Mahamudra system based on 
the Prajnaparamita scriptures and emphasizing shamatha and vipashyana 
and the progressive journey through the five paths and ten bhumis. 
Sutrayana. The sutra approach to achieving enlightenment which includes 
the Hinayana and the Mahayana. 
Svabhavakakaya. (Tib. ngo bo nyid kyi sku) The “essence body.” Sometimes 
counted as the fourth kaya, the unity of the first three. 
Tantra. (Tib. gyu.) Literally, tantra means “continuity,” and in Buddhism it 
refers to two specific things: the texts (resultant texts, or those that take 
the result as the path) that describe the practices leading from ignorance 
to enlightenment, including commentaries by tantric masters; and the 
way to enlightenment itself, encompassing the ground, path, and fruition. 
One can divide Buddhism into the sutra tradition and the tantra tradition. 
The sutra tradition primarily involves the academic study of the Mahayana 
sutras and the tantric path primarily involves practicing the Vajrayana 
practices. The tantras are primarily the texts of the Vajrayana practices. 
Tantra Mahamudra (Tib. sngags kyi phyag chen) The same as mantra 
Mahamudra. The Mahamudra practice connected to the six dharmas of 
Naropa.. 
Tathagatagarbha. The same as buddhanature. The inherently present potential 
for enlightenment in all sentient beings. 
Ten non-virtuous actions. Killing, stealing, sexual misconduct, lying, slander, 
abusive words, idle gossip, covetousness, ill-will, and wrong views. Acts 
are non-virtuous or unwholesome when they result in undesirable karmic 
81
Teachings on the Practice of Meditation 
effects. Thus, this list of ten unwholesome acts occurs generally in 
discussions of the functioning of karma. The first three are actions of 
body, the next four of speech, and the last three of mind. The ten virtuous 
actions are the opposites of the above ten non-virtuous actions. 
Tenjur. Commentary on the Kanjur; also tantras of meditation, healing, 
scientific and technical instructions etc. 
Therevada. A school of Buddhism mainly practicing the Hinayana. 
Three jewels. (Tib. kin chok sum) Literally “three precious ones.” The three 
essential components of Buddhism: Buddha, dharma, sangha, i.e., the 
Awakened One, the truth expounded by him, and the followers living in 
accordance with this truth. Firm faith in the three precious ones is the 
stage of “stream entry.” The three precious ones are objects of veneration 
and are considered “places of refuge.” The Buddhist takes refuge by 
pronouncing the threefold refuge formula, thus acknowledging formally 
to be a Buddhist. 
Three realms. These are three categories of samsara. The desire realm includes 
existences where beings are reborn with solid bodies due to their karma 
ranging from the deva paradises to the hell realms. The form realm is 
where beings are reborn due to the power of meditation; and their bodies 
are of subtle form in this realm. These are the meditation paradises. The 
formless realm is where beings due to their meditation (samadhi), have 
entered a state of meditation after death and the processes of thought and 
perception have ceased. 
Three roots. Guru, yidam and dakini. Guru is the root of blessings, yidam of 
accomplishment and dakini of activity. 
Three vehicles. Hinayana, Mahayana and Vajrayana. 
Tilopa. (928-1009 C.E.) One of the eighty-four mahasiddhas who became 
the guru of Naropa who transmitted his teachings to the Kagyu lineage 
in Tibet. 
Tonglen. Giving and taking. A bodhichitta practice of giving one’s virtue and 
happiness to others and taking their suffering and misdeeds upon oneself. 
Tranquillity meditation. (Tib. shinay, Skt. shamatha) One of the two main 
types of meditation, calm abiding, the meditative practice of calming the 
mind in order to rest free from the disturbance of thought activity, the 
other is insight. 
Two accumulations. (Tib. shogs nyis) The accumulation of merit with concepts 
and the accumulation of wisdom beyond concepts. 
82
Glossary of Terms 
Two truths. Relative truth and ultimate truth. Relative truth describes the 
superficial and apparent mode of all things. Ultimate truth describes the 
true and unmistaken mode of all things. These two are described differently 
in the different schools, each progressively deeper leading closer to the 
way things are. 
Ultimate truth. (Tib. dondam) There are two truths or views of reality: relative 
truth which is seeing things as ordinary beings do with the dualism of “I” 
and “other” and ultimate truth, which transcends duality and sees things 
as they are. 
Vajra posture. This refers to the full-lotus posture in which the legs are 
interlocked. When one leg is placed before the other as many Westerners 
sit it is called the half-lotus posture. 
Vajradhara. “Holder of the vajra.” Vajra means indestructible and dhara means 
holding, embracing or inseparable. The central figure in the Kagyu refuge 
tree, and indicating the transmission of the close lineage of the Mahamudra 
teachings to Tilopa. Vajradhara symbolizes the primordial wisdom of the 
dharmakaya and wears the ornaments of the sambhogakaya Buddha, 
symbolizing its richness. 
Vajrayogini. (Tib. Dorje Palmo) A semi-wrathful yidam. Female. 
Vajrayana. (Tib. dorje tek pa) Literally, “diamond-like” or “indestructible 
capacity.” Vajra here refers to method, so you can say the method yana. 
There are three major traditions of Buddhism (Hinayana, Mahayana, 
Vajrayana) The Vajrayana is based on the tantras and emphasizes the clarity 
aspect of phenomena. A practitioner of the method of taking the result as 
the path. 
Vinaya. One of the three major sections of the Buddha’s teachings showing 
ethics, what to avoid and what to adopt. The other two sections are the 
sutras and the abhidharma. 
Wheel of dharma. (Skt. dharmachakra) The Buddha’s teachings correspond to 
three levels which very briefly are: the first turning was the teachings on 
the four noble truths and the teaching of the egolessness of person; the 
second turning was the teachings on emptiness and the emptiness of 
phenomena; the third turning was the teachings on luminosity and buddha 
nature. 
Yana. Means capacity. There are three yanas, narrow, (Hinayana) great 
(Mahayana) and indestructible (Vajrayana). 
Yidam. (Tib.) Yi means mind and dam means pure, or yi means your mind 
and dam means inseparable. The yidam represents the practitioner's 
83
Teachings on the Practice of Meditation 
awakened nature or pure appearance. A tantric deity that embodies 
qualities of buddhahood and is practiced in the Vajrayana. Also called a 
tutelary deity. 
Yidam meditation. (Tib.) Yidam meditation is the Vajrayana practice that uses 
the visualization of a yidam. 
Yoga. “Natural condition.” A person who practices this is called a yogi, 
characterized by leaving everything natural, just as it is, e.g. not washing 
or cutting your hair and nails etc. A female practitioner is called a yogini. 
  84
Index 
ff, Abhidharma 42 
Amitabha 25 
Bodhichitta 2, 9, 10, 17, 18, 53 
Bodhisattva 13, 17, 20, 36, 46, 
50, 51, 53 
Buddha nature 20, 49, 50 
Buddhahood 4, 5, 30, 37, 50-52 
Chenrezig 20, 22 
Completion stage 5, 6, 8, 55, 58, 59 
Consciousness 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 41, 
42, 57,59 
Eight consciousnesses 37, 57 
Eighth consciousness 36 
Mental consciousness 34, 35, 38, 
41, 42, 57 
Sense consciousness 35, 37, 41, 
42,59 
Seventh consciousness 36 
Six consciousnesses 34, 36 
Sixth consciousness 34-36, 38, 41, 
57 
Deity 5, 6, 20, 44, 49-55 
Peaceful deities 5,6 
Wrathful deities 5, 6, 49 
Dharma protector 5 
Dharmapala 5, 52, 54 
Dharmadhatu 13, 50, 56 
Dharmakaya 50 Dharmata 23 
Dzogchen 6,7, 15 
Emptiness 5, 16, 50, 51, 53, 54, 56- 
58, 60, 61 
Excitement 39-40 
Five aggregates 24 
Skandha 24 
Five buddhas 24 
Five wisdoms 13, 37 
Generation stage 5, 6, 49, 51, 52, 
53, 55, 58 
Innate wisdom 5, 43 
Insight 2, 4,5, 6, 8, 37, 49, 53, 55, 
58, 59 
Lhaktong 4,59 
Vipashyana 4, 58,59 
Kagyu 1, 23 
Klesha 4, 5, 13, 15, 21, 36, 37, 38, 
50, 54 
Madhyamika 57 
Mahamudra 1, 6, 7, 9, 15, 49, 57 
Mahayana 17, 34 
Mandala 5, 50, 58 
Mantra 21,58 
Mental affliction 4, 5, 11, 13, 15, 21, 
36, 37, 50 
Mental dullness 21, 26, 39 
Mental formation 33, 43, 44 
85
Teachings on the Practice of Meditation 
Samskara 33, 43, 44 
Mental posture 27 
Mindfulness 26, 31, 33, 38, 39, 43 
Mudra 1, 6, 7,9, 15, 25, 49, 57 
Nirmanakaya 51 
Nirvana 7 
Obscurations 20, 50, 51 
Physical posture 23, 24, 27, 40 
Samadhi 38 
Sambhogakaya 51 
Samsara 5,7, 36, 40, 44 
Shravakayana 34 
Shunyata 50 
Siddhi 4 Sutra 5, 7, 49 
Tantra 5 
Tonglen 13, 14, 18, 44, 46, 47 
Torpor 39, 40, 52, 62 
Tranquillity 2, 4,5, 6, 8, 23, 26, 
29, 37, 38, 49, 52, 53, 55, 58, 59, 
62 
Shamatha 4, 58, 59 
Shinay 4, 23, 38, 46 
Vairochana 23, 24, 26 
Vajra posture 24 
Vajrayana 1, 4,5, 6, 8,9, 17, 18, 
20, 22, 33, 49, 62 
Yidam 5, 49, 51, 52, 54 
  86
Books by Thrangu Rinpoche 
ff, The Three Vehicles of Buddhist Practice. 
This book gives an overview of the Hinayana, Mahayana, and Vajrayana 
as it was practiced in Tibet. Boulder: Namo Buddha Publications, 1998. 
The Middle-way Meditation Instructions of Mipham Rinpoche. 
This great Tibetan scholar who actually stayed for a while with the previous 
Thrangu Rinpoche at his monastery describes how one develops 
compassion and then expands this to bodhicitta and eventually develops 
prajna or wisdom. Boulder: Namo Buddha Publications, 2000. 
The Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice. 
There are the four thoughts one should contemplate before practicing 
and are: precious human birth; impermanence; karma; the downfalls of 
samsara. Boulder: Namo Buddha Publications, 2001. 
Transcending Ego: Distinguishing Consciousness from Wisdom. 
A translation of the Third Karmapa, Rangjung Dorje’s brilliant 36 verse 
doha spanning this topic and includes a lucid and accessible commentary 
on these verses by Thrangu Rinpoche. This book is a virtual textbook of 
Buddhist psychology by an authentic teacher from a lineage that continues 
to be alive today even though it is a 1,000 years old. Boulder: Namo 
Buddha Publications, 2001. 
Showing the Path of Liberation. 
The Dorje Chang Tungma or Short Prayer to Dorje Chang is one of the 
most recited supplications.for practitioners of Mahamudra. Composed 
by Penkar Jampal Zangpo after his completion of eighteen years of solitary 
retreat on Mahamudra it is said to have unparalleled blessing. Because it 
outlines the entire path of Mahamudra Thrangu Rinpoche has used it 
here as the basis and outline for this profound teaching on the path of 
liberation. Namo Buddha and Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal Publications 2001. 
87
Teachings on the Practice of Meditation 
Journey of the Mind: Teachings on the Bardo. 
When one dies, the mind takes an intense and very important journey 
through the bardo—that intermediate state between death and rebirth 
in the next body. To prepare for this journey, we must understand what 
is happening to us in the bardo and also how we can prepare for this 
journey while still living. Thrangu Rinpoche discusses this complex process 
in lucid terms and explains its significance to every day meditation. Zhyisil 
Chokyi Ghatsal Publications 2000. 
The Essence of Creation and Completion. 
Every Vajrayana practice has two phases to it: the creation stage in which 
one creates the visualization and the completion stage in which one 
dissolves the visualization. Jamgon Kongtrul wrote an important text 
describing these two processes and Thrangu Rinpoche gives a detailed 
commentary on this root text. The book includes a translation of the 
root text as well as Rinpoche’s commentary. Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal 
Publications. 2000 
The Life of Tilopa & The Ganges Mahamudra 
The first section of this book is the spiritual biography of Tilopa, the 
Indian yogi who is considered the founding father of the Kagyupa 
tradition. The second section contains the root text and commentary on 
the Ganges Mahamudra; Tilopa’s oral instructions for accomplishing 
enlightenment, considered the source text for all Kagyu doctrine and the 
tradition of Mahamudra meditation in general. Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal 
Publications 2002. 
Medicine Buddha Teachings. 
88 The first half of this book presents the stages of practice of the Medicine 
Buddha Sadhana, in which Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche elucidates not 
only the details of this particular practice, but also many of the basic 
principles of tantric theory and practice in general. For anyone engaged 
in any Vajrayana practice, this teaching is very useful in understanding 
the foundations of tantric practice, and a garden of delights. The second 
half of this book consists of Thrangu Rinpoche’s teachings on the Medicine 
Buddha Sutra, formally called The Twelve Great Aspirations of the Medicine 
Buddha by the Buddha Shakyamuni. Included is the Medicine Buddha 
sadhana along with two shorter versions and an excerpt of the Mahayana 
sutra detailing the twelve aspirations themselves. Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal 
Publications 2001.
Books by Thrangu Rinpoche 
The Practice of Tranquility and Insight. 
This book is a practical guide to the two types of meditation that form 
the core of Buddhist spiritual practice. An extremely detailed book which 
is an invaluable guide for anyone doing Buddhist meditation. Snow Lion 
Publications. 
To order books contact: 
Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal Publications. email: orders@greatliberation.org 
or Namo Buddha Publications. email: cjohnson@ix.netcom.com 
or to view our entire range go to: 
www.greatliberation.org 
  89
Meditation Centre Information 
For more information and instruction 
please contact one of the following centres. 
Rumtek Monastery 
International Seat of His Holiness 17th Karmapa Urgyen Trinley Dorje 
Sikkim, INDIA 
Sherab Ling Buddhist Institute: Seat of His Eminence Tai Situpa 
Kangra District, Himachal Pradesh, 176-125, INDIA 
Ph: (01894) 63013/63757 
New Zealand 
Karma Choeling Buddhist Monastery 
66 Bodhisattva Road 
RD1 Kaukapakapa 
Ph: 09 420 5428 
www.kagyu.org.nz 
Karma Thigsum Choeling 
PO Box 3160 
Christchurch 
Ph: 03 384 4626 
Kagyu Samten Choling 
PO Box 917 
Gisborne 
Ph: 06 867 1956 Australia 
Kagyu Thigsum Chokyi Ghatsal 
PO Box 235, Newstead 
Tasmania 
Ph/fax: 03 6334 9680 
Karma Tashi Choling 
PO. Box 973 
Bega, NSW 2550 
Ph: 02 6496 7169 
Kagyu E-Vam Buddhist Institute 
673 Lygon Street, 
Carlton North, Vic. 3054 
Ph: 03 9387 0422 
For a list of Karma Kagyu Centres worldwide, contact: 
Karma Triyana Dharmachakra 
352 Meads Mt Rd, Woodstock, New York 12498 
(914) 679-5906, email office@kagyu.org www.kagyu.org 
Kagyu Samye Ling Monastery & Tibetan Centre 
Eskdalemuir, Langholm, Dumfriesshire, Scotland, DG13 OQL 
(013) 873 73232, email scotland@samyeling.org www.samyeling.org 
90
Long Life Prayer 
for 
Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche 
Karma Lodro, 
Splendour of the Teachings, 
May you remain steadfastly present, 
Your qualities of the glorious 
And good Dharma spreading 
as far as space can go. 
May your activity of Teaching 
And Practice be 
Universally victorious, 
And may the magnificance 
Of this triumph blaze forth. 
written by Situ Pema Wangchok Gyalpo 
     
Care of Dharma Books 
Dharma books contain the teachings of the Buddha. They have the power to 
protect against lower rebirth and to point the way to Liberation. Therefore, 
they should be treated with respect: kept off the floor and places where people 
sit or walk: and not stepped over. They should be covered or protected for 
transporting and kept in a high, clean place separate from more “ordinary” 
things. If it is necessary to dispose of Dharma materials, they should be burned 
with care and awareness rather than thrown in the trash. When burning Dharma 
texts, it is considered skilful to first recite a prayer or mantra, such as OM, AH, 
HUNG. Then you can visualize the letters of the text (to be burned) being 
absorbed into the AH, and the AH being absorbed into you. After that you can 
burn the texts. 
These considerations may be also kept in mind for Dharma artwork, as well as 
the written teachings and artwork of other religions.
PHILOSOPHY/EASTERN RELIGIONS 
 
