OcEAN OF DHARMA SERIES 
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE 
 
    
  
  
    oLong olife Prayer 
for 
tis HoLiness 17TH GyaLwanc Karmapa 
UcveN TRINLEY DoRJE 
Naturally arising Dharmakaya, unchanging and ever-present, 
Karmapa, You appear as the Form Kaya’s magical illusion. 
May Your Three Secret Vajras remain stable in the realms 
And Your Infinite Spontaneous Activity blaze in glory. 
written by 
  
  
          
       
OCEAN of DHARMA 
Series 
comprise oral teachings given by Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche. They 
cover many of the main themes of the Buddha's teachings, presented 
in a style easily accessible for Western students. 
They are reproduced through 
the inspiration of H.H. Karmapa, 
the blessing of Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche, 
the guidance of Ven. Lama Karma Shedrup, 
and the permission of Namo Buddha Publications. 
This series is dedicated, 
to their long life and prosperity. 
    
   
         é, aa ; 
elf sammie Zhyi-sil Cho-kyi Gha-tsal 
Publications
OCEAN OF DHARMA BOOKLET SERIES 
Buddhist Conduct: 
The Ten Virtuous Actions 
Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche
ISBN number: 1-877294-11-X 
Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal Publications 
PO Box 6259, Wellesley St, 
Auckland, New Zealand 
email: inquiries@greatliberation.org 
website: www.greatliberation.org 
This booklet is not copyrighted so it can be reproduced 
by centers. 
Note: 
We have italicized the technical words the first time they 
are used to alert the reader that they may be found in 
the Glossary of Terms. 
Cover statue courtesy of Ven. Lama Shedrup.
Contents 
  Biography of Thrangu Rinpoche 
Foreword 11 9 
An Introduction to Buddhist Conduct 13 
The Virtuous Actions of Body 
The Virtuous Actions of Speech 
The Virtuous Actions of Mind 
Questions & Answers 37 
The Nine Obstructions to Liberation 
Glossary of Terms 45 
Meditation Centre Information 
Long Life Prayer for Thrangu Rinpoche 53 15 
25 
31 
44 
55
Biography of Thrangu Rinpoche 
  The lineage of the Thrangu Rinpoche incarnations began in the 
fifteenth century when the Seventh Karmapa, Chodrak Gyatso visited 
the region of Thrangu in Tibet. At this time, His Holiness Karmapa 
established Thrangu Monastery and enthroned Sherap Gyaltsen as the 
first Thrangu Rinpoche, recognizing him as the re-established 
emanation of Shuwu Palgyi Senge, one of the twenty-five great siddha 
disciples of Guru Padmasambhava. 
Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche is the ninth incarnation of this lineage 
and was born in Kham, Tibet in 1933. When he was four, H.H. The 
Sixteenth Gyalwa Karmapa and Palpung Situ Rinpoche recognized him 
as the incarnation of Thrangu Tulku by prophesying the names of his 
parents and the place of his birth. 
He entered Thrangu monastery and from the ages of seven to sixteen 
he studied reading, writing, grammar, poetry, and astrology, memorised 
ritual texts, and completed two preliminary retreats. At sixteen under 
the direction of Khenpo Lodro Rabsel, he began the study of the three 
vehicles of Buddhism while staying in retreat. 
At twenty-three he received full ordination from the Karmapa. 
When he was twenty-seven, Rinpoche left Tibet for India at the time 
of the Communist invasion. He was called to Rumtek, Sikkim, where 
the Karmapa had his seat in exile. At thirty-five, he took the geshe 
examination before 1500 monks at Buxador monastic refugee camp 
in Bengal, and was awarded the degree of Geshe Lharampa. On his 
9
Buddhist Conduct: The Ten Virtuous Actions 
return to Rumtek he was named Abbot of Rumtek monastery and the 
Nalanda Institute for Higher Buddhist studies at Rumtek. He has 
been the personal teacher of the four principal Karma Kagyu tulkus: 
Shamar Rinpoche, Situ Rinpoche, Jamgon Kongtrul Rinpoche and 
Gyaltsab Rinpoche. 
Thrangu Rinpoche has travelled extensively throughout Europe, 
the Far East and the USA. He is the abbot of Gampo Abbey, Nova 
Scotia, and of Thrangu House, Oxford, in the UK. In 1984 he spent 
several months in Tibet where he ordained over 100 monks and nuns 
and visited several monasteries. He has also founded Thrangu Tashi 
Choling monastery in Boudhnath; a retreat centre and college at Namo 
Buddha east of the Kathmandu Valley, and has established a school in 
Boudhnath for the general education of lay children and young monks. 
He also built Tara Abbey in Kathmandu. In October of 1999 he 
consecrated the college at Sarnath which will accept students from the 
different traditions of Buddhism and will be open to Western students 
as well. 
Thrangu Rinpoche has given teachings in over 25 countries and is 
especially known for taking complex teachings and making them 
accessible to Western students. Thrangu Rinpoche is a recognised master 
of Mahamudra meditation. 
More recently, because of his vast knowledge of the Dharma, he 
was appointed by His Holiness the Dalai Lama to be the personal tutor 
for the recently escaped Seventeenth Karmapa. 
  10
  
  5. 
CNG, 
Ven. Lama Karma Shedrup Chogyi Senge Kartung 
Foreword 
I am very pleased that the pure and profound dharma teachings 
of Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche are now being reproduced here 
in English for the many students in the Southern Hemisphere, 
fulfilling a long time wish of mine. 
Thrangu Rinpoche is one of the most important living masters of 
the Karma Kagyu Lineage of Buddhism. Through his vast wisdom 
and immeasurable love and compassion he has turned the wheel 
of dharma in all directions. 
Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche is a highly realised master of the 
Mahamudra lineage who has also attained mastery of the many 
scriptures and general sciences. Thus to receive teachings from 
him with his easily accessible and skilful presentation is very 
fortunate. 
Therefore I would like to express my sincere appreciation to 
Rinpoche for bestowing this blessing on us and to Clarke Johnson 
of Namo Buddha Publications for permission and assistance in 
reproducing these teachings. 
    
11
Buddhist Conduct: The Ten Virtuous Actions 
  
To dharma practitioners I pray that through receiving these 
teachings, what arises is correct understanding, fruitful practice 
and fulfilment of all the Buddhadharmas. Please treasure and 
respect this book as a direct teaching of the Buddha, which 
liberates limitless beings. 
May this merit cause the life and teachings of the great masters to 
flourish and remain for many eons benefiting limitless sentient 
beings. 
  Written on the 22nd of April 2000. 
Karma Choeling Buddhist Monastery 
66 Bodhisattva Road 
RD 1 Kaukapakapa 
New Zealand 
      
12
An Introduction to Buddhist Conduct 
  In the practice of Buddhism there is the view, the meditation and the 
conduct. In this booklet we will examine the conduct of the Buddhist. 
In the Tibetan system there are three main kinds or aspects of 
conduct. First there are the Pratimosksha vows of the Hinayana which 
are practiced by ordained monks and nuns. These consist of following 
several hundred rules. Then there is the conduct of the bodhisattvas 
who are practitioners on the Mahayana path who have taken the vow to 
help all beings reach enlightenment before they themselves reach this 
state. Finally, there is the conduct of the Vajrayana practitioner which is 
based on the vows and commitments of certain practices. 
Whatever type of vows one undertakes there are ten things to be 
avoided or given up, and ten things to practice or embrace. One avoids 
the ten negative or non-virtuous actions because they are harmful to 
oneself and to others, and one practices the ten positive or virtuous 
actions because they are beneficial to oneself and others. 
These ten virtuous and non-virtuous actions are divided into three 
levels of conduct: those of body, those of speech and those of mind. 
There are what is called “the simple practices of virtuous conduct of 
body, speech and mind” and also “the special practices of virtuous conduct 
of body, speech and mind.” The simple practice of virtuous conduct is 
when one realizes the faults of engaging in negative actions and simply 
refrains from such activity. The special practice of virtuous conduct is 
13
Buddhist Conduct: The Ten Virtuous Actions 
when one not only refrains from committing the negative actions but 
also practices the positive actions. In terms of simple virtuous conduct, 
we abstain from the three negative actions of the body, the four negative 
actions of the speech and the three negative actions of the mind. 
The Ten Virtuous Actions 
1. Not to Take Life 
2. Not to Take What is Not Given 
3. Avoid Sexual Misconduct 
4. Not to deceive 
5. Avoid Slander of Others 
6. Avoid Harsh Words 
7. Avoid Empty Speech 
8. Avoid Avaricious Thoughts 
9. Not to be Malicious 
10. Avoid the Wrong View 
As a practical meditation exercise one can take a vow to not do these for 
a day, three days, a week, a month etc. Ordained individuals take all ten 
vows for as long as they are ordained. If one takes a vow and keeps it 
one derives the positive karma from this action. If one simply doesn’t 
perform the negative action, such as killing, but doesn’t take the vow 
then one doesn’t derive any positive karma from it (but obviously also 
doesn’t get any negative karma from killing). 
  14
2 
The Virtuous Actions of Body 
  THE FIRST VIRTUOUS ACTION: 
Not To Take Life 
The first negative action of the body is killing; so one must give up the 
taking of life. 
There have to be four factors present to make the action of killing 
complete and therefore a negative act. There has to be the object of the 
action, the intention, the action itself, and that action has to be 
completed. If these four aspects of an action aren’ all present then killing 
need not necessarily be a negative action. 
THE OBJECT OF THE ACTION 
In order for the act of killing to occur there must be the actual object 
or being who will be killed. It can be any kind of living being, from a 
small insect to a large animal. It must be a being capable of experiencing 
sensations and sufferings. There are religions which teach that plants 
have a mind and therefore they consider plants as sentient beings who 
should not be killed, but according to the Buddha this is not so. When 
one talks about not killing one refers only to beings who have minds 
and can experience suffering. This does not apply to inanimate things 
such as stones or plants and so on. For an act of killing to be a 
15
Buddhist Conduct: The Ten Virtuous Actions 
completely negative act it must be directed against a true living being 
who has a mind. 
THE INTENTION 
For something to be the negative action of killing a second factor must 
be present: the intention. One must have the motivation to harm that 
being for the action to fall into the category of killing. If we think “This 
being is going to harm me” or “It is dangerous and therefore I wish to 
kill it” one is killing out of anger and the desire to cause harm. One can 
also kill through the motivation of desire by thinking, for example, “If 
T kill this being then I will have food, clothing, pleasure and enjoyment.” 
One can also kill through the motivation of ignorance, such as sacrificing 
an animal for religious reasons, thinking “If I kill this being then the 
act will be good and beneficial because this was in the scriptures.” 
However it is not a good intention because it was a killing carried out 
with the motivation of ignorance. If one does not realize that one is 
killing a being then there is not the negative result that comes from an 
act of killing. Knowledge and intention must be there. 
On rare occasions killing is done through a good motivation, in 
which case a negative result will not come from that action. In the 
account of a previous life of the Buddha he was a sea captain. At that 
time a great fortune of jewels could be obtained by going out to sea, but 
it was a risky adventure and one could either return wealthy or not at 
all. If one set out to sea one needed a guide to lead the ship: a good 
person with experience. In a previous life the Buddha was such a captain, 
and his actual name was “Courage.” He led 500 merchants on a ship to 
obtain jewels, but there was a very negative person on that ship who 
became very angry with everyone else. He thought that if he made a 
hole in the bottom of the boat it would sink and all the merchants 
would die. He didn’t care if it killed him too. But Courage saw this and 
thought “IfI kill him then it will save the other merchants. The negative 
result of killing will come to me, but it doesn’t matter what happens to 
me. I have to save the 500 merchants and must also save this man from 
16
The Virtuous Actions of Body 
accumulating such negative karma.” With this motivation Courage 
hit this man on the head with an axe and he died. Because of the good 
motivation this act did not lead to negative karma. He killed one man 
but saved the lives of 500 people, and therefore it was a good action 
instead of a negative one. Though the act may be an act of killing it 
may not be a negative action. This is because of the motivation that 
was involved. 
THE ACTION ITSELF 
As well as having the object and the motivation there must be the third 
factor of undertaking of the action of killing. This means that although 
one may have the intention of killing someone one has to carry it out 
for it to be the negative act of killing. One has to take a sword and 
attack someone or to get poison and give it to someone and so on. One 
does not need to perform this action oneself; one can make someone 
else do it by instructing and paying them to kill another being. When 
that person has committed the action one feels happy, thinking, “Oh, it 
is good that being was killed.” Even though it is not one’s own action, 
but carried out according to one’s instructions, it is still one’s own negative 
action of killing because one is responsible for having made someone 
else do it. So as well as the motivation to kill there is the actual act of 
killing, whether done by oneself or done according to one’s wishes. 
THE COMPLETED ACTION 
Finally, the fourth factor is called “completion.” Even though one has 
performed the act of killing, for it to be a true act of killing the being 
must die as a result of one’s action. One might have the intention and 
one might carry out the action but one could fail to actually kill the 
person, or the person might recover through medical treatment and so 
on. While this is obviously a negative act it does not count as a real act 
of killing. If one has ordered someone else to kill somebody and he 
disobeys or fails in his job this is also not an actual act of killing. It is 
17
Buddhist Conduct: The Ten Virtuous Actions 
clear that one’s attempt is a negative action that leads to negative karma, 
but if one’s action fails in its goal then it does not become the very 
negative action of killing. 
So one can avoid the act of killing by avoiding an action that has all 
four factors present, and in doing so one is practicing virtuous conduct. 
THE SPECIAL PRACTICE: 
TO SAVE OTHERS’ LIVES 
There is also special virtuous conduct, in which case one not only avoids 
killing other beings but actually saves the lives of other beings who are 
in danger. It is special and superior in relation to the simple practice of 
virtuous conduct. Avoiding killing and saving the lives of other beings 
is the first of the ten virtuous actions. 
THE REASON 
Generally, killing is a very negative action. The reason for this is that 
sentient beings cling to their own body and life. All appearances in this 
world are present due to their having a life. If their life ceases then all 
appearances of the world will be lost. For that reason an individual’s life 
is very precious to them. To lose this causes great suffering, and therefore 
killing is a serious action. 
THE SECOND VIRTUOUS ACTION: 
Not Taking What Is Not Given 
The most precious thing for a sentient being is his or her life. Wealth 
and possessions are the second most important thing. Since life is very 
important, a human being will go through a lot of hardships and 
difficulties for the sake of their possessions which sustain life. This is 
true for animals too. Although animals have no attachment to gold and 
jewels they still have strong attachment to food and other things which 
they perceive as necessary to sustain their lives. Some beings have greater 
18
The Virtuous Actions of Body 
attachment to things than others do. One should use the things that are 
one’s own possessions and not take possessions from others by force or 
by deceiving them. If one deprives others of their possessions it will 
cause suffering and harm to them. Also it causes harm to one’s self 
because the result of one’s actions will definitely come back to oneself. 
For this reason one should avoid stealing and accomplish the virtuous 
action of not stealing. 
There are many categories of stealing or taking what is not given. 
As explained in relation to not killing, there are four aspects to this 
action. There is the object, the motivation, the act and the completion. 
THE OBJECT 
" The object of the negative action of stealing is taking something which 
is possessed by someone else. The object must have an owner who has 
the thought that the object “is mine.” “It belongs to me and is my 
property.” It also has to be of a certain value. If it has no value to a 
person and losing it makes no difference to that person then taking it 
is not a negative act. If it is something not owned by anyone then 
taking it is not negative or harmful. In the past there were some 
religions in India that said if one obtains something it must be given 
to you by someone else. So they taught that if you are in an isolated 
valley and drink some water then that is stealing because you are taking 
something that is not given to you. But the Buddha said that this is 
not a negative action. He said it is only a negative action if you obtain 
something that is a possession of someone else and you take it without 
that person’s permission. 
THE INTENTION 
The motivation means that one has to have the thought that “There is 
this thing that belongs to someone else, and I am going to get it without 
them seeing me” or “I want that object so I am going to use force to 
take it from him even though he doesn’t want me to have it.” One may 
19
Buddhist Conduct: The Ten Virtuous Actions 
also think “I want this thing so I will deceive the owner to obtain it. I 
will tell him all sorts of lies and use various methods so that I can obtain 
the object from that person.” In this last case one does not steal directly, 
but through indirect means one obtains something from another person. 
These are the thoughts one has when the action is non-virtuous. 
If the motivation is absent it is not a harmful action resulting in 
negative karma. One might take something because two objects look 
very similar, and one mistakenly goes off with someone else’s things. 
This is not a negative action because the motivation was not there. Or 
one might think “This belongs to my friend who is not here now. He is 
my very good friend and he won't mind if take it.” Taking that object 
is also not a negative action because there is no motivation to steal. One 
might also think “This is so insignificant and nobody really cares whether 
they have it or not so it does not matter if I take it.” If one has that 
motivation it is not a negative action. 
The motivation must be present for stealing to be a negative action. 
If we can abandon such thoughts then we are avoiding the motivation 
of stealing. 
THE ACTION ITSELF 
The third characteristic of a complete negative action is the actual 
application to the action itself: where one carries out the intention to 
steal something either by force or by deception. 
As in the case of the act of killing, there are three kinds of negative 
acts for stealing. Committing the act by stealing yourself, having 
somebody else steal for you, or rejoicing in hearing that somebody else 
steals, without being personally involved or benefiting from the action 
in any way. 
THE COMPLETED ACTION 
The fourth factor is actually completing the action. One might have 
the motivation to steal and carry out the action but fail to steal the 
20
The Virtuous Actions of Body 
object. If one is not able to complete what one intended to do one does 
not get the full negative result from the action. If, on the other hand, 
one has been able to get what one wants and one thinks “I have robbed 
this object through force (or deception)” then there is the completion 
of the act, and one receives the negative result from the action. 
If one has failed to complete the action and this thought does not 
arise in the mind the result is less negative. If one can avoid, and give 
up, the complete negative action one accomplishes the simple practice 
of not stealing. 
THE SPECIAL PRACTICE: 
TO GIVE TO OTHERS 
The special practice is not only to give up the act of stealing but also to 
practice giving to others. This can be of two kinds: pure and impure. 
The pure act of giving is a virtuous act, and the giving is really beneficial 
for the recipient. The impure act of giving may seem to be a virtuous 
action but in fact it is not because it has a harmful result. For example, 
when one has an impure motivation one gives something to someone 
with the motivation that “This will cause harm to the person I am 
giving it to.” This is a negative motivation and makes it an impure act 
of giving. Alternatively, the object given may be impure; one may give 
a weapon or poison to someone. Such things are impure objects because, 
through their use, they will cause harm to the recipient or others. If one 
gives such things to a person and thinks “Due to my giving, it will be 
beneficial for that being’s future” then that thought is good, but if it 
results in unhappiness and suffering then the object is impure. 
Also, the object one gives should be one’s own possession. It may be 
the case that other people may also have the right to decide what should 
be done with an object. If you decide by yourself “Yes, I think it is all 
right if I give this away” the other person, who also has rights, will be 
unhappy. That is then an improper object of generosity. To be a pure act 
of giving the motivation and the object have to be pure so that others 
are not harmed. This concerns inanimate objects. If it is a living being 
21
Buddhist Conduct: The Ten Virtuous Actions 
the act should be beneficial. If all aspects are correct then it is a special 
and virtuous action of giving. 
THE THIRD VIRTUOUS ACTION: 
To Avoid Sexual Misconduct 
It is said that the most important thing for a living being is their life. 
What is then most important is their possessions. Following that what 
is most important is the companion that they love. Based on this 
understanding one must avoid harming the lives of others and avoid 
causing them suffering by taking their possessions. If the loved 
companion is made unhappy it is not good either. Also, if the companion 
of someone else is made to suffer it is not good. So one must also avoid 
causing others suffering and sadness through one’s sexual misconduct. 
The analysis is the same as for the previously discussed acts. First 
there is the object of the action, which is someone who is not one’s own 
companion. Then there is the motivation, which in this case could be 
to satisfy one’s own desires, wishing to cause harm or a mental state of 
ignorance out of which the action is committed. The third factor is 
carrying out the action. The fourth factor is that if the act is done with 
the motivation of desire, the wish to harm or through ignorance then 
one will experience the results of having committed a negative action. 
Therefore one should avoid sexual misconduct. Then one’s own 
partner will not be unhappy and worry but will have peace of mind, 
and other people will not have suffering, difficulties and worries. In 
this life and also in the next life one will not encounter difficulties 
and problems as a result of one’s action. Instead there will be peace 
and happiness. 
THE SPECIAL PRACTICE: 
TO TAKE THE VOW 
Taking the vow not to engage in sexual misconduct is the special practice 
concerning sex. 
22
The Virtuous Actions of Body 
THE RESULTS OF ENGAGING 
IN GOOD CONDUCT OF BODY 
Avoidance of the three physical negative acts of killing, stealing and 
sexual misconduct are classified as “discipline,” or shila in Sanskrit which 
means “coolness.” It is very hot in India so coolness is considered to be 
very pleasant. Following correct conduct means that one has to be careful 
and restrain one’s actions. The result is that one experiences peace: the 
mind becomes very relaxed and at ease which is a very pleasant state. If 
one maintains correct conduct one does not encounter difficulties and 
problems from engaging in negative conduct. Because one’s mind is at 
peace, relaxed and open, one also feels relaxed and comfortable physically. 
  23
The Virtuous Actions of Speech 
  THE FOURTH VIRTUOUS ACTION: 
Not To Deceive 
We might think that by lying to somebody we can easily get what we 
want, but in fact it only creates problems for oneself in this life and in 
future lives. The Sakya Pandita said that when a person lies he thinks 
that he is deceiving somebody else, but in fact he isn’t deceiving anybody 
but himself. If you lie to others and think “Now I have deceived them” 
they will think “There is no point in listening to what that person says 
because he has lied to me before.” In contrast, if someone always tells 
the truth others think “I must listen to what he says because it is true, 
meaningful and beneficial.” If one lies others will think “There is no 
point in listening because it is meaningless and not beneficial at all. 
There is as much point in listening to him as to an echo.” 
Also, if you are going to lie then who do you lie to? You do not lie 
to someone who doesn't have any faith in you and would not believe 
you anyway. The person you lie to is someone who trusts you, someone 
who likes you, someone who thinks that what you say is the truth. That 
is the only person you can lie to because he or she believes in you and is 
actually deceived. Afterwards that person will realize that you have 
deceived them, and this means that you will lose that person's trust. So 
in the future that person will not believe what you say. In this way you 
25
Buddhist Conduct: The Ten Virtuous Actions 
only deceives yourself because you lose the trust of others. If you want 
to accomplish something you will not be able to do so because people 
will not trust what you say. 
THE FOUR FACTORS 
Again, the four factors that make an act negative need to be avoided: 
The object of the action of lying must be a person or being who 
understands what you say, not an animal or stone. It has to be somebody 
who understands. 
The motivation does not refer to saying things out of fun or to have 
a laugh; it is the motivation of intending to deceive somebody. 
The actual act is telling a lie with the motivation of deceiving 
somebody. If one lies out of ignorance, thinking something was true 
and telling this to somebody else, it is not a lie because the motivation 
has to be intentional. 
The completion of the act is when you say something deceptive, 
whether the person who hears believes what you say to be true or 
not. The action is carried out and there will be the negative effect of 
having lied. 
So by avoiding the action of telling a lie one performs the ordinary 
virtuous action. 
THE SPECIAL PRACTICE: 
TO TELL THE TRUTH 
One must have very clear understanding and wisdom in order to engage 
in the special practice of telling the truth. Generally speaking, telling 
the truth is very important and good. However, sometimes telling the 
truth can cause problems and difficulties for people. In such cases it is 
important not to tell the truth. If one has good motivation and tells 
someone the truth it can cause that person to become angry; it can 
cause a division between people or harm them. Therefore one should 
not tell the truth in those situations. Instead one should tell a lie, but 
26
The Virtuous Actions of Speech 
with the motivation to benefit and help the person you are lying to, or 
on the basis of that untruth being told that it will benefit someone else 
or a great number of people. The situation of telling a lie with the 
motivation to help someone is not a negative action. Whereas if one 
tells a lie in order to deceive someone it is a negative action. This applies 
to telling the truth too. If you tell the truth with a negative motivation 
it will cause harm to people and is not a virtuous action. 
THE FIFTH VIRTUOUS ACTION: 
To Avoid Slander 
There may be two people who like each other and, through the 
motivation of pride, anger or envy, one wishes to say something which 
will curn them against each other. This is the action of slander or divisive 
speech. 
The object of that action is the two people who are friendly with 
each other. 
The motivation is pride, anger or envy and the wish to turn people 
against each other because one thinks it will benefit oneself. 
The actual action is saying something to turn people against each 
other. 
The completion of the action is when a conflict between those people 
arises. 
This is an action that one should avoid. Giving up speech that 
turns people against each other is the simple practice. 
THE SPECIAL PRACTICE: 
TO BRING PEOPLE TOGETHER 
Bringing people together or removing conflicts is the special practice. 
Two people may be in conflict and one reconciles them by saying “This 
person does not mean to harm you and it will be very good if you are 
friends again.” Bringing people together with speech is the special good 
action in relation to the act of slander or divisive speech. 
27
Buddhist Conduct: The Ten Virtuous Actions 
THE SIXTH VIRTUOUS ACTION: 
To Avoid Harsh Words 
The sixth negative action is using harsh or unkind words. 
The object of this is a person who can understand what you say. 
The motivation for using harsh words is usually envy or anger. 
Actually saying harsh words to others, whether true or not, whether 
you say it directly or imply it, is the act. 
The completion of the act is when the other person hears what you 
say and is upset or unhappy. 
The result of having said harsh words to someone is that they will 
become your enemy in the future. So one should avoid speaking harsh 
words, which is the simple virtuous action. 
THE SPECIAL PRACTICE: 
TO USE PLEASANT WORDS 
The special practice of this point is using pleasant and gentle words 
which make other people happy. 
There is an exception here. Some people may say something harsh 
to someone with a good motivation because gentle speech does not stop 
the person from engaging in negative conduct. With the motivation of 
helping someone avoid doing something negative one must speak harshly 
to them. If this is done with a good motivation and if that person stops 
doing negative things and learns control it is a beneficial action. If the 
motivation is not for one’s own benefit but for the benefit of others, 
harsh words are beneficial. 
If, in spite of our good motivation to help, harsh words don’t help 
or affect the other person then it is better not to use them at all. But if 
one can actually benefit somebody by using harsh words then it is a 
Virtuous action. 
28
The Virtuous Actions of Speech 
THE SEVENTH VIRTUOUS ACTION: 
To Avoid Empty Speech 
The object of empty or idle speech is somebody who can understand 
what you say. 
The motivation is having an irresistible desire to keep on talking or 
to be angry, envious or proud so that one speaks negatively about 
someone and praises oneself. Or, through the motivation of desire, one 
praises oneself. 
The actual activity is to say useless or idle words. 
The completion is that the other person understands what you say, 
whether they accept it or not. 
If the person accepts what you say then when it is something said 
through anger it can increase that person’s anger. If it is something 
being said through desire it can increase that person's desire and that 
person’s envy, and so on. Even if that person doesn’t accept what you say 
it will increase their emotions so that it has a harmful result, which 
creates negative circumstances. If one can avoid this kind of talk then it 
avoids creating harm and negative circumstances. 
There may be something which seems like empty speech but which 
may not bea negative action. For example, when you meet a person and 
want to make them happy you may say things that seem to be 
unnecessary, or in order to benefit someone you may say all sorts of 
things. Somebody may feel unhappy and sad then, in order to make 
them happy, one talks to them about all sorts of different things. This is 
done with a motivation to benefit the person. If one talks about “this 
and that” with a good motivation and it has a beneficial effect it is not 
a negative action; it is a positive action. Even if it is not just to benefit 
others but just to please them and make them happy then it is good. 
One of the actions of a bodhisattva is to speak pleasantly and nicely to 
people: to hold a conversation with them that makes them happy. 
Another of the activities of a bodhisattva is the four actions which draw 
people towards the dharma. The second of these is to speak pleasantly, 
in such a way that it makes them feel happy. Therefore, if one says 
29
Buddhist Conduct: The Ten Virtuous Actions 
whatever is necessary to please people and make them happy then this is 
not a negative action; this is a virtuous action. 
To avoid the use of unnecessary speech is the simple or ordinary 
action. 
THE SPECIAL PRACTICE: 
TO USE MEANINGFUL SPEECH 
The special good action related to unnecessary speech is that when one 
speaks one doesn’t say meaningless things; instead, one’s speech is always 
meaningful. 
  30
4 
The Virtuous Actions of Mind 
  THE EIGHTH VIRTUOUS ACTION: 
To Avoid Avaricious Thoughts 
Avarice is the desire for things that one sees which belong to other 
people. One may see another person who has possessions, wealth or 
even desirable qualities. They look good and attractive, and one thinks, 
“I want to have these. They could be mine.” That is the cause for this 
negative action of avarice. 
The motivation and action of avarice are the same thing because 
they are both of the mind. 
Increasing the negative motivation of wanting things that belong 
to others becomes the basis for all kinds of negative actions, because 
this thought is expressed in one’s actions and speech through anger, 
desire and so on. 
Not only does it cause harm and unhappiness for the person who 
owns the things that one wants to possess but it also causes trouble for 
oneself. We should see that there is no real benefit in getting any of the 
things we desire because there is no end to satisfying desire: when we 
want one thing and get it then we will want two and more. There is 
never an end to desire, and as a result we perform actions that cause 
trouble for ourselves and for others. We should think “Well, I am 
attracted to things that others have, but it won't do me any good because 
31
Buddhist Conduct: The Ten Virtuous Actions 
desire can never be satisfied, and I will always want more. I will create 
unhappiness with this desire and then that other person will also create 
difficulties for me.” By realizing this we see that the best thing to do is 
to avoid avarice. 
The simple virtuous action is when we realise that avarice is 
something negative and then give it up. 
THE SPECIAL PRACTICE: 
TO BE CONTENT 
The special virtuous action is when we avoid avarice and also become 
content with whatever we have. If we are content with whatever we 
have then we can easily accomplish whatever we want to do. Furthermore, 
if we are content we will not trouble other people. 
THE NINTH VIRTUOUS ACTION: 
Not To Be Malicious 
The second virtuous action of the mind is not to be malicious. For 
instance, in a state of anger or envy one wishes harm to come to 
somebody: that they suffer and have difficulties. One wishes “May they 
have problems.” Either wishing to harm them oneself or wishing that 
others harm them is a negative motivation which leads to increasing 
harm. Because one does not have a pure motivation other people will 
perceive this motivation and one’s malice. They will begin to dislike 
you, turn against you and become your enemies. You will find that you 
will lose your friends and will no longer have anyone to help you. This 
motivation is negative for oneself and for others. If one has the wish 
that harm comes to others it leads to involvement with all sorts of 
methods by which harm can be brought to other people. This motivation 
always leads to a negative result, which is the reason why one should 
avoid malice. 
Avarice and malice are negative actions which are included within 
desire and anger. Even so, it can be the case that one has the desire to 
32
The Virtuous Actions of Mind 
obtain wealth and possessions for the sake of benefiting other people. In 
that case desire for possessions is not negative but positive. In terms of 
harming someone, it may be that someone causes a lot of harm to other 
people and one has the wish to get rid of him in one way or another: to 
expel him to another place, have him arrested and put away or even 
killed. If this is being done for the sake of helping a great number of 
people then the wish to harm such an individual is not a negative action. 
THE TENTH VIRTUOUS ACTION: 
To Avoid The Wrong View 
The tenth negative action to be avoided is the holding of mistaken 
beliefs or wrong views. This is when one has a mistaken opinion 
concerning special things, such as the Three Jewels (the Buddha, the 
dharma and the sangha). However, it may not just be about the dharma 
teachings. Someone may have a good motivation and give good advice, 
saying “What you are doing is wrong. You shouldn't do this” and so on. 
If one understands that the person has a good motivation and the advice 
is beneficial then it will be beneficial to oneself, but if one thinks “He 
doesn’t like me and is saying something very unpleasant to me; he is 
trying to make things bad for me’ it is an error, and you have a mistaken 
perception. In this case, the good motivation of that person is wasted, 
and his advice cannot help. In fact it becomes a source of harm, in that 
one has interpreted it as being something harmful for oneself. Therefore 
if one is given advice one shouldn't just think “This is bad or wrong.” 
One shouldn't allow oneself to easily fall into this misconception but 
should examine it very carefully to see whether it is beneficial and said 
with a good motivation. 
One should avoid misconceptions and mistaken beliefs. 
33
Buddhist Conduct: The Ten Virtuous Actions 
THE SPECIAL PRACTICE: 
TO EXAMINE AND LEARN TO UNDERSTAND 
Examining, analysing and understanding the truth and the real nature 
of things is the special practice in association with mistaken views. 
CONCLUSION 
To summarise, there are three negative actions of the body, four of the 
speech and three of the mind. These make up the ten negative actions. 
In contrast to these are three virtuous actions of the body, four of the 
speech and three of the mind which make the ten virtuous actions. If 
one practices the ten negative actions it will cause harm for others and 
also for oneself. Therefore they should be avoided. If one practices the 
ten positive actions, it will be beneficial for oneself and for others. By 
performing the ten virtuous actions everything will go well because one 
will be in harmony with others. Practicing in accordance with the dharma 
teachings will not run counter to one’s ordinary human life; in fact, 
one’s ordinary human life will go very well, and one will cause no 
problems. If one practices virtuous conduct it will be beneficial in this 
life and the next. 
Virtuous conduct is called “shila” in Sanskrit, which means 
“pleasant coolness.” One will not accomplish shila through the practice 
of negative actions. For example, in terms of killing, one may have an 
enemy and think “Well, if I can kill this enemy then things will be very 
pleasant. It will be very good.” But if one kills the enemy one discovers 
that happiness does not come. One may have killed that enemy but he 
has friends and relatives who will also become one’s enemy. So one’s 
enemies increase in number rather than diminish. If one follows virtuous 
conduct and does not kill that enemy then there is no way that the 
number of enemies one has will increase. 
Following conduct that is in harmony with the dharma means 
that in this life we will have the “pleasant coolness.” It will also bring 
good results for one’s future life. Therefore the correct conduct is called 
34
The Virtuous Actions of Mind 
“shila.” Of course, it is important to practice meditation and the 
dharma because through these we can overcome the emotional 
disturbances and obtain Jiberation. But the basis for the practice of 
dharma is good conduct of our body and speech, so one should 
therefore try to follow this correct conduct. It is very difficult to have 
the complete and perfect aspects of such conduct; but we should try as 
much as we can for the sake of our dharma practice. That completes 
the teachings on the ten virtuous actions. 
  35
Questions & Answers 
  Question: How is it regarded if you save the life of one person by killing 
another person; for example if one person is threatening another person's 
life and is about to kill him and you intervene by killing that person to 
save the life of the other? 
Rinpoche: This depends on the circumstances or the motivation. For 
example, if the person who is in danger is a relative or friend and one 
wishes to save them by killing another person, it can have a negative 
result. If the person in danger of being killed is somebody who can 
benefit many people and the one who is going to kill him is not of any 
benefit to anybody, then one may think, “It is much better if he dies 
than the other one.” That motivation is good because the person whose 
life is in danger would help many beings. If one kills the bad person it 
would not be a negative action, so it depends upon the motivation. 
Question: In practice, then, would one have to have the insight of a 
bodhisattva to decide which way to act? I have all sorts of ideas of people 
I feel it would be beneficial to eliminate on the spot. I get scared, first of 
all for myself and secondly because I am not completely confident that 
my insight into the truth of the matter, of the far-reaching consequences 
is at all accurate. 
Rinpoche: There is a danger involved in that one needs to have the 
wisdom that can see, “Well, if I get rid of this person, then it will be 
very beneficial. It will bring happiness to many people and prevent a 
great deal of harm being caused.” If one could really see that this is so 
and got rid of that person, it would not be a negative action. But if one 
thinks, “Probably this will be good if this person was killed,” it is not 
37
Buddhist Conduct: The Ten Virtuous Actions 
good enough. One cannot really be sure that if one kills a general of an 
army that he will not be replaced by another person who will do the 
same things. That would be a pointless action, something without any 
positive results. One really has to have the full wisdom to know that it 
is beneficial and not just the thought that it is probably beneficial. 
Question: What is the karmic result of an accidental killing, for example, 
if someone drives a car and another person stepped out and was run 
over? 
Rinpoche: I don’t think negative karma would come from accidentally 
killing someone in a car because one does not have the intention to kill. 
The motivation is not there. Also, one has not carried out an act designed 
to kill another person, rather one has made a mistake. Therefore there 
should not be a negative result. One might be driving along and someone 
crosses the road. If one gets angry, shouting, “What is he doing on the 
road?” and hits the pedestrian, a negative result will come because there 
is the motivation of anger. 
Question: Rinpoche, what do you think about someone asking to be 
killed when they are very sick? 
Rinpoche: A negative result would come from that because although 
that person is experiencing great suffering through his illness he still 
hopes that he might get better and find happiness in the future. Killing 
him would be an act committed out of ignorance: it would be killing 
without being aware that there is still the hope that he may become free 
from that suffering. Somebody may be very depressed and say, “Please 
kill me,” and it may seem that killing this person is beneficial at that 
moment. But there is always the opportunity to become cured and to 
find happiness in the future. Even though the person had the wish, he 
might change his mind as you kill him, “Oh, I think I made a mistake” 
but then it is too late. 
Question: There are a lot of cases where people are really old and it is 
certain that they have only two or three months left without any chance 
that they can recover from cancer or something else. If they ask for 
something to kill themselves with, what should one do? 
38
Questions & Answers 
Rinpoche: They may want to die but inside everyone has attachment to 
life and still has hope to continue living. For example, there is a story of 
an old man who was very ill and felt that it would be better if he died. 
He led a long and good life and thought, “It would be best if I died 
now.” He asked for a divination to see whether he might die now. They 
did the divination and the answer was, “It looks like you are going to 
die.” When he heard that he was very upset. Without this knowledge it 
would be a negative effect, like committing suicide. However this person 
had the knowledge of what would happen within the next few weeks 
and a way of avoiding that experience. With that knowledge, it would 
not have the negative effect like suicide. 
Question: Do people who commit negative actions have negative karma? 
Rinpoche: With the impure motivation, the negative action and the 
negative completion they will have a result that comes from the action; 
a negative karma that will ripen. But it is said that there are four kinds 
of karma: 
First is the evident result of one’s actions. One does a powerful and 
negative action and within that very lifetime the result will be 
experienced. 
The second kind of karmic result is where the karma is not so strong 
and the result is experienced after rebirth. Somebody may do negative 
things but not experience the result in this life, but in the next lifetime 
he will experience much suffering. 
The third kind of karmic result comes from actions which are less 
strong and will be experienced in a future lifetime, i.e. the result is not 
experienced in that life, or the next but in some other life in the future. 
The fourth kind is called “the indefinite karmic result” that comes 
in minor negative actions. One may experience the result some time in 
the future or one may not experience the result. It is uncertain. 
If one has committed a negative action, then the result will come in 
accordance with the strength of the action. 
Question: How can one purify negative karma?” 
Rinpoche: Through the “Four Powers of Purification”: 
39
Buddhist Conduct: The Ten Virtuous Actions 
The first power is that of repudiation; rejection of one’s actions, i.e. 
thinking, “What I did was wrong and negative.” One regrets that one 
has committed that action. 
The second power is that of remedy, where one regrets and applies 
oneself to doing virtuous actions in order to counteract the negative 
ones. 
The third power is that of reliance, in which case one prays to the 
Buddhas and bodhisattvas for the purification of the negative actions 
one regrets. 
The fourth power is that of not repeating the action. One thinks, “I 
carried out this negative action and regret it. I am not ever going to do 
it again.” 
Through applying those powers, one can purify the karma of a 
negative action which one has committed. 
Question: If my memory is correct, I remember Rinpoche saying that 
the karmic result achieved is from a karmic trace being left. I had always 
understood this to be a mental trace. There seems to be a contradiction 
here between the four powers of a negative action in that a mental trace 
can be left where the most important part seems to be the intention. 
Supposing I bashed somebody on the head, I think that he is dying and 
am glad about it. I go home, he recovers and I do not know anything 
about it. From the point of view of the mental trace, that should be 
enough to complete the whole thing. I mean, whether he recovers or 
not, that’s not the point from the view of the mental trace. 
Rinpoche: There is a phase in which karmic results come about, which 
is called the “fruitful ripening of karmic result.” There is also what is 
called “the corresponding result,” which is the result corresponding with 
the cause. There are two kinds, a corresponding result which is 
experienced and a corresponding result which continues. These mean 
that if, for example, one has killed somebody, in the next life one will 
experience various unpleasant things with the fully ripening result. A 
corresponding result is that one experiences a short life in the next life 
from having killed somebody, so various results correspond with the 
action. That is the corresponding result which is experienced. 
40
Questions & Answers 
The corresponding result which continues is that if one has killed 
in this life, in the next life one still has the tendency and will 
spontaneously want to kill again; or if one steals in this life, one will 
continue stealing in the next life. Even as a child, one will like stealing 
or killing. So if one hit someone on the head and thinks he has died but 
he hasn't, then a strong karmic trace is not left within oneself because 
one thought he was dead and afterwards finds out that he wasn’t. Even 
if one doesn't find out that he is not dead, such a strong karmic trace is 
not left because one might find out that he hasn't been killed and this 
can be known through an external power in the object itself; so it doesn’t 
just involve the mind. 
Question: In other words, ignorance is the unconscious part of the 
killer's mind, which perceives, although the conscious mind doesn’t hear? 
Is that what you mean? 
Rinpoche: Yes, it is like that. In terms of the eight consciousnesses, it is 
the sixth consciousness which thinks, “Yes, he is dead. He has been 
killed.” But in the eighth consciousness, which is the ground 
consciousness, the karmic trace or imprint of having killed someone 
cannot take place. 
Student: Now I get it. 
Question: If you say harsh things to somebody, how do you know that 
they dont take it as an insult? 
Translator: Rinpoche said that you can only say harsh words if others 
take notice of it, but you don’t know that. If it does any good to speak 
harshly to someone and you think, “If I speak harshly, it won't do any 
good,” then do not do it. Or you think, “If I speak harshly, it will 
probably work,” then you can do it. 
Question: If I have some of these negative actions, what is the karma? 
Rinpoche: I have the idea that you really do not have negative karma. 
My feeling is more open. Normally in carrying out negative actions and 
accumulating negative karma, there is an enjoyment of performing the 
act. For example one kills and likes killing, so one carries on and does as 
much as one is able to. If one has regret, it means you dislike it and 
don’t want to do it anymore. That puts an end to it and from then on 
41
Buddhist Conduct: The Ten Virtuous Actions 
you avoid it. Because there is dislike for the action and regret, it causes 
a transformation in the karmic traces or latencies in oneself. Due to 
that, the harmfulness of the negative karma gradually diminishes. 
Question: In Buddhist countries or in the monastery of Rinpoche, what 
does he do with somebody who is cheating, stealing or lying? 
Rinpoche: There are many different monasteries and each has its own 
way of managing things. My view is that if somebody is stealing, it is 
good to meditate on patience. But if one finds that meditating on patience 
does not work, then it is important to find out the truth. Who really 
supervises truth? It is the government. So, the best thing is to hand this 
thing over to the police. If they work out what is right and what is 
wrong, then this is my view. 
Question: I have two questions: If somebody lies out of fear, what would 
your view be? Secondly, if somebody creates mischief and tells lies, how 
would you deal with that? 
Rinpoche: If someone acts negatively out of fear, then I think there is 
little harm from that. If a person is in danger, to become free from that 
danger he tells lies. I think there is little harm from that. The habitual 
lying is harmful if done with a negative motivation. 
Question: I did not quite understand what you meant by wrong view. 
Rinpoche: Wrong view is a negative action through the fact that it 
prevents a benefit from coming to oneself. There is something beneficial 
and because of one’s mistaken view one prevents it from benefiting 
oneself. There may be someone who is giving us beneficial advice because 
we have a fault. We can have lots of problems because of that fault. 
Someone tells us to remove that fault, which is beneficial advice given 
to us. But we have to examine this advice that we received to see that it 
is beneficial and not make an immediate judgment, “He is just criticizing 
me and saying there are things wrong with me,” feeling anger instead. 
Because one has a mistaken belief that he is not trying to benefit, the 
mistaken belief hinders accepting the beneficial advice. On the contrary, 
one thinks he is being nasty and harsh, thus misinterpreting the advice. 
Thus, one does not get the benefit. 
42
Questions & Answers 
Similarly, in terms of the wrong view towards the Three Jewels, 
they are not something that intentionally is going to harm someone. It 
depends upon one’s own attitude whether they are beneficial for oneself 
or not. If one has the wrong view about them, then one prevents their 
good from benefiting oneself. This is why wrong view is to be avoided. 
  43
The Nine Obstructions to Liberation 
  (The obstructions are not discussed in the text, but are part 
of another system. These are the unwholesome qualities 
one can have and why they are negative.) 
Obstruction 
1. Passion 
2. Anger or aggression 
3. Pride 
4. Ignorance 
5. Incorrect view 
6. Having negative behavior 
7. Indecisive mind 
8. Envy or jealousy 
9. Stinginess 
44 Fault Which Obstructs 
Desire to leave samsara 
Equanimity of mind 
Seeing self as having faults. 
Seeing true nature of phenomena 
Realization of nonself 
Entering the genuine path. 
Entering the correct path 
Helping other sentient beings. 
Generosity on the path.
  Abhidharma. Teachings on Buddhist metaphysics focusing on the training of 
discriminating knowledge. 
Bodhichitta. (Tib. chang chup chi sem) Literally, the mind of enlightenment. 
There are two kinds of bodhichitta: absolute bodhichitta, which is 
completely awakened mind that sees the emptiness of phenomena, and 
relative bodhichitta which is the aspiration to practice the six paramitas 
and free all beings from the suffering of samsara. 
Bodhisattva. (Tib. chang chup sem pa) “Heroic mind” Bodhi means blossomed 
or enlightened, and sattva means heroic mind. Literally, one who exhibits 
the mind of enlightenment. Also an individual who has committed him 
or herself to the Mahayana path of compassion and the practice of the six 
paramitas to achieve buddhahood to free all beings from samsara. These 
are the heart or mind disciples of the Buddha. 
Buddha. (Tib. sang gye) An individual who attains, or the attainment of, 
complete enlightenment, such as the historical Shakyamuni Buddha. 
Buddhahood. (Tib. sang gyas) The perfect and complete enlightenment of 
dwelling in neither samsara nor nirvana. Expression of the realization of 
perfect enlightenment, which characterizes a Buddha. The attainment of 
buddhahood is the birthright of all beings. According to the teachings of 
Buddha, every sentient being has, or better is already, buddha nature; 
thus buddhahood cannot be “attained.” It is much more a matter of 
experiencing the primordial perfection and realizing it in everyday life. 
Buddha nature. (Tib. de shegs nying po) The essential nature of all sentient 
beings. The potential for enlightenment. 
Definitive meaning. The Buddha's teachings that state the direct meaning of 
dharma. They are not changed or simplified for the capacity of the listener, 
in contrast to the provisional meaning. 
45
Buddhist Conduct: The Ten Virtuous Actions 
Dharma. (Tib. ché) This has two main meanings: first, any truth, such as that 
the sky is blue; and secondly, the teachings of the Buddha (also called 
“Buddha-dharma’). 
Dharmachakra. (Skt. Wheel of Dharma). The three vehicles of Buddhist practice; 
Hinayana, Mahayana and Vajrayana. When referring to the thirty-two 
marks of a Buddha it is the design of an eight-spoked wheel. 
Eight consciousnesses. The all-ground consciousness, mind-consciousness, 
afflicted consciousness, and the five sense-consciousnesses. The Hinayana 
sutras generally discuss mind in terms of six consciousnesses, namely, the 
five sensory consciousnesses and the sixth mental consciousness. The 
Mahayana Cittamatra school (Mind-only) school talks about the eight 
consciousness in which the first six are the same but has the 7 and 8" 
consciousnesses added. In the Hinayana tradition the functions of the 7" 
and 8" consciousness are subsumed in the 6 mental consciousness. 
Eight fold noble path. Right view, right thought, right speech, right action, 
right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness and right concentration. 
Eight worldly concerns. (Tib. jik ten ché gysh) These keep one from the path; 
they are attachment to gain, attachment to pleasure, attachment to praise, 
attachment to fame, aversion to loss, aversion to pain, aversion to blame 
and aversion to a bad reputation. 
Emotional disturbances. (Skt. klesha, Tib. nyén mong) Also called the “afflictive 
emotions,” these are the emotional afflictions or obscurations (in contrast 
to intellectual obscurations) that disturb the clarity of perception. These 
are also translated as “poisons.” They include any emotion that disturbs 
or distorts consciousness. The main kleshas are desire, anger and ignorance. 
The five kleshas are the three above plus pride and envy/jealousy. 
Emptiness. (Tib. tong pa nyi Skt. shunyata) A central theme in Buddhism. It 
should not lead one to views of nihilism or the like, but is a term indicating 
the lack of any truly existing independent nature of any and all phenomena. 
Positively stated, phenomena do exist, but as mere appearances, 
interdependent manifestations of mind with no limitation. It is not that 
it is just your mind. As mind is also free of any true existence. This frees 
one from a solipsist view. This is interpreted differently by the individual 
schools. 
Enlightenment. (Tib. jang chub) The definition varies according to the Buddhist 
tradition, usually the same as buddhahood. The Hinayana tradition defines 
liberation as the freedom from rebirth in samsara, with mind free of 
46
Glossary of Terms 
ignorance and emotional conflict. The Mahayana tradition holds that 
enlightenment is not complete without development of compassion and 
commitment to use skilful means to liberate all sentient beings. In the 
Vajrayana teachings, the foregoing stages of enlightenment are necessary, 
but ultimate enlightenment is a thorough purification of ego and concepts. 
The final fruition of complete liberation transcends all duality and 
conceptualization. 
Four reminders. The four ordinary foundations: the difficulty in obtaining the 
precious human body, impermanence and death, karma; cause and effect, 
the shortcomings of samsara. Reflection on these four reminders causes 
the mind to change and become directed toward the dharma. 
Four seals. The four main principles of Buddhism: all compounded phenomena 
are impermanent, everything defiled (with ego-clinging) is suffering, all 
phenomena are empty and devoid of a self-entity, and nirvana is perfect 
peace. 
Four truths. The Buddha's first teachings. 1) All conditioned life is suffering. 
2) All suffering is caused by ignorance. 3) Suffering can cease. 4) The 
eight-fold path leads to the end of suffering: Right understanding, thought, 
speech, action, livelihood, effort, mindfulness and meditation. 
Graded path. This refers to being guided through the path to enlightenment 
through the three principle paths, 1) renunciation, 2) enlightened motive 
of bodhicitta, 3) and a correct understanding of emptiness (wisdom ). 
Guru. (Tib. lama) A teacher in the Tibetan tradition who has reached 
realization. 
Hinayana. (Tib. tek pa chung wa) Literally, the “lesser vehicle.” The first of 
the three yanas, or vehicles. The term refers to the first teachings of the 
Buddha, which emphasized the careful examination of mind and its 
confusion. It is the foundation of Buddha's teachings focusing mainly on 
the four truths and the twelve interdependent links. The fruit is liberation 
for oneself. 
Idiot compassion. This is the desire to help others but it is not accompanied by 
sufficient wisdom, so that what one does may not really be beneficial. An 
example is teaching someone who is hungry to fish, yet the person receives 
bad karma for killing the fish. 
Insight meditation. (Skt. Vipashyana meditation. Tib. lha tong) Sanskrit for 
“insight meditation” This meditation develops insight into the nature of 
reality (Skt. dharmata). One of the two main aspects of meditation practice, 
the other being shamatha. 
47
Buddhist Conduct: The Ten Virtuous Actions 
Interdependent origination. The twelve links of causal connections which binds 
beings to samsaric existence and thus perpetuate suffering: ignorance, 
karmic formation, consciousness, name and form, the six sense bases, 
contact, sensation, craving, grasping, becoming, rebirth, old age, and 
death. These twelve links are like an uninterrupted vicious circle, a wheel 
that spins all sentient beings around and around through the realms of 
samsara. 
Kagyu (Tib.) Ka means oral and gyuz means lineage; The lineage of oral 
transmission. One of the four major schools of Buddhism in Tibet. It was 
founded in Tibet by Marpa and is headed by His Holiness Karmapa. The 
other three are the Nyingma, the Sakya and the Gelugpa schools. 
Karma (Tib. day) Literally “action.” The unerring law of cause and effect, eg. 
Positive actions bring happiness and negative actions bring suffering. The 
actions of each sentient being are the causes that create the conditions for 
rebirth and the circumstances in that lifetime. 
Karmapa. The name means Buddha activities. The Karmapas are the head of 
the Kagyu school of Buddhism and were the first to implement the 
tradition of incarnate lamas. Karmapas are thought to be an emanation 
of the bodhisattva Avalokiteshvara. 
Lama. (Skt. guru) La nobody above himself or herself in spiritual experience 
and ma expressing compassion like a mother. Thus the union of wisdom 
and compassion, feminine and masculine qualities. Lama is also a title 
given to a practitioner who has completed some extended training. 
Liberation. See enlightenment. 
Mahayana. (Tib. tek pa chen po) Literally, the “great vehicle.” These are the 
teachings of the second turning of the wheel of dharma, which emphasize 
shunyata (see shunyata), compassion and universal buddha nature. The 
purpose of enlightenment is to liberate all sentient beings from suffering 
as well as oneself. Mahayana schools of philosophy appeared several 
hundred years after the Buddha’s death, although the tradition is traced 
to a teaching he is said to have given at Rajgriha, or Vulture Peak Mountain. 
Mara. (Tib. du) Difficulties encountered by the practitioner. The Tibetan 
word means heavy or thick. In Buddhism mara symbolizes the passions 
that overwhelm human beings as well as everything that hinders the arising 
of wholesome roots and progress on the path to enlightenment. There are 
four kinds: skandha-mara, which is incorrect view of self; klesha-mara, 
which is being overpowered by negative emotions; matyu-mara, which is 
48
Glossary of Terms 
death and interrupts spiritual practice; and devaputra-mara, which is 
becoming stuck in the bliss that comes from meditation. 
Nirvana. (Tib. nyangde) Literally, “extinguished.” Individuals live in samsara 
and with spiritual practice can attain a state of enlightenment in which 
all false ideas and conflicting emotions have been extinguished. This is 
called nirvana. The nirvana of a Hinayana practitioner is freedom from 
cyclic existence, an Arhat. The nirvana of a Mahayana practitioner is 
buddhahood, free from extremes of dwelling in either samsara or the 
perfect peace of an Arhat. 
Obscurations. There are two categories of obscurations or defilements that 
cover one’s buddha nature: the defilement of conflicting emotions (See 
emotional disturbances) and the defilement of latent tendencies or 
sometimes called the obscuration of dualistic perception, or the 
intellectual/cognitive obscurations. The first category prevents sentient 
beings from freeing themselves from samsara (liberation), while the second 
prevents them from gaining accurate knowledge and realising truth 
(buddhahood). 
Paramita. “Transcendental” or “Perfection.” Pure actions free from dualistic 
concepts that liberate sentient beings from samsara. The six paramitas 
are: diligence, patience, morality, generosity, contemplation, and 
transcendental knowledge or insight. 
Partial compassion. The desire to feel sorry for and want to help others, but 
only if they are of a certain gender, race, ethnic group, social status, etc. 
Pratimoksha vows. “Individual liberation.” The seven sets of precepts for 
ordained and lay people according to the vinaya. 
Provisional meaning. The teachings of the Buddha which have been simplified 
or modified to the capabilities of the audience. This contrasts with the 
definitive meaning. 
Real Nature. (Skt. Dharmata, Tib. ché nyi) Dharmata is often translated as 
“suchness” or “the true nature of things” or “things as they are.” It is 
phenomena as it really is or as seen by a completely enlightened being 
without any distortion or obscuration, so one can say it is “reality.” (see 
two truths) 
Rebirth. Continuous, cyclic rebirth into the realm of samsara. Consciousness 
of an individual enters form according to his or her karma, the causes and 
conditions created by previous actions. 
Relative truth. (Tib. kunsop) There are two truths: relative and absolute or 
49
Buddhist Conduct: The Ten Virtuous Actions 
ultimate truth. Relative truth is the perception of an ordinary 
(unenlightened) being who sees the world with all his or her projections 
based on the false belief in “I” and “other.” 
Sakya Pandita. A heriditary head of the Sakya lineage. A great scholar (1181- 
1251 C.E.) 
Samsara. (Tib. kor wa) “Cyclic existence.” The conditioned existence of ordinary 
life in which suffering occurs because one still possesses attachment, 
aggression and ignorance. It is contrasted to nirvana. Through the force 
of karma motivated by ignorance, desire and anger one is forced to take 
on the impure aggregates and circle the wheel of existence until liberation. 
Sangha. (Tib. gen dun) “Virtuous One” Sang means intention or motivation 
and gha means virtuous. One with virtuous motivation. One of the three 
jewels. Generally refers to the followers of Buddhism, and more specifically 
to the community of monks and nuns. The exalted sangha is those who 
have attained a certain level of realization of the Buddha’s teachings. 
Sentient beings. With consciousness, an animated being as opposed to an 
inanimate object. All beings with consciousness or mind who have not 
attained the liberation of buddhahood. This includes those individuals 
caught in the sufferings of samsara as well as those who have attained the 
levels of a bodhisattva. 
Sutra. (Tib. do) Literally “Junction.” The combination of the Hinayana and 
Mahayana, or the combination of wisdom and compassion. Texts in the 
Buddhist cannon attributed to the Buddha. They are viewed as his recorded 
words, although they were not actually written down until many years 
after his paranirvana. They are usually in the form of dialogues between 
the Buddha and his disciples. These are often contrasted with the tantras 
which are the Buddha’s Vajrayana teachings and the shastras which are 
commentaries on the words of the Buddha. 
Tantra. (Tib. gyz.) Literally, tantra means “continuity,” and in Buddhism it 
50 refers to two specific things: the texts (resultant texts, or those that take 
the result as the path) that describe the practices leading from ignorance 
to enlightenment, including commentaries by tantric masters; and the 
way to enlightenment itself, encompassing the ground, path, and fruition. 
One can divide Buddhism into the sutra tradition and the tantra tradition. 
The sutra tradition primarily involves the academic study of the Mahayana 
sutras and the tantric path primarily involves practicing the Vajrayana 
practices. The tantras are primarily the texts of the Vajrayana practices.
Glossary of Terms 
Three jewels. (Tib. kin chok sum) Literally “three precious ones.” The three 
essential components of Buddhism: Buddha, dharma, sangha, i.e., the 
Awakened One, the truth expounded by him, and the followers living in 
accordance with this truth. Firm faith in the three precious ones is the 
stage of “stream entry.” The three precious ones are objects of veneration 
and are considered “places of refuge.” The Buddhist takes refuge by 
pronouncing the threefold refuge formula, thus acknowledging formally 
to be a Buddhist. 
Three realms. These are three categories of samsara. The desire realm includes 
existences where beings are reborn with solid bodies due to their karma 
ranging from the deva/god paradises to the hell realms. The form realm is 
where beings are reborn due to the power of meditation; and their bodies 
are of subtle form in this realm. These are the meditation paradises. The 
formless realm is where beings due to their meditation (samadhi), have 
entered a state of meditation after death and the processes of thought and 
perception have ceased. 
Three vehicles. Hinayana, Mahayana and Vajrayana. 
Tranquillity meditation. (Tib. shinay, Skt. shamatha) One of the two main 
types of meditation, calm abiding, the meditative practice of calming the 
mind in order to rest free from the disturbance of thought activity, the 
other is insight. 
Two truths. Relative truth and ultimate truth. Relative truth describes the 
superficial and apparent mode of all things. Ultimate truth describes the 
true and unmistaken mode of all things. These two are described differently 
in the different schools, each progressively deeper leading closer to the 
way things are. 
Ultimate truth. (Tib. dondam) There are two truths or views of reality34relative 
truth which is seeing things as ordinary beings do with the dualism of “I” 
and “other” and ultimate truth, which transcends duality and sees things 
as they are. 
Vajrayana. (Tib. dorje tek pa) Literally, “diamond-like” or “indestructible 
capacity.” Vajra here refers to method, so you can say the method yana. 
There are three major traditions of Buddhism (Hinayana, Mahayana, 
Vajrayana) The Vajrayana is based on the tantras and emphasizes the clarity 
aspect of phenomena. A practitioner of the method of taking the result as 
the path. 
Vinaya. One of the three major sections of the Buddha's teachings showing 
51
Buddhist Conduct: The Ten Virtuous Actions 
ethics, what to avoid and what to adopt. The other two sections are the 
sutras and the abhidharma. 
Wheel of dharma. (Skt. dharmachakra) The Buddha's teachings correspond to 
three levels which very briefly are: the first turning was the teachings on 
the Four Noble Truths and the teaching of the egolessness of person; the 
second turning was the teachings on emptiness and the emptiness of 
phenomena; the third turning was the teachings on luminosity and buddha 
nature. 
Yana. Means capacity. There are three yanas, narrow, (Hinayana) great 
(Mahayana) and indestructible (Vajrayana). 
  52
Meditation Centre Information 
For more information and instruction 
please contact one of the following centres. 
Rumtek Monastery 
International Seat of His Holiness 17th Karmapa Urgyen Trinley Dorje 
Sikkim, INDIA 
Sherab Ling Buddhist Institute: Seat of His Eminence Tai Situpa 
Kangra District, Himachal Pradesh, 176-125, INDIA 
Ph: (01894) 63013/63757 
New Zealand 
Karma Choeling Buddhist Monastery 
66 Bodhisattva Road 
RD1 Kaukapakapa 
Ph: 09 420 5428 
www.kagyu.org.nz 
Karma Thigsum Choeling 
PO Box 3160 
Christchurch 
Ph: 03 384 4626 
Kagyu Samten Choling 
PO Box 917 
Gisborne 
Ph: 06 867 1956 Australia 
Kagyu Thigsum Chokyi Ghatsal 
PO Box 235, Newstead 
Tasmania 
Ph/fax: 03 6334 9680 
Karma Tashi Choling 
P.O. Box 973 
Bega, NSW 2550 
Ph: 02 6496 7169 
Kagyu E-Vam Buddhist Institute 
673 Lygon Street, 
Carlton North, Vic. 3054 
Ph: 03 9387 0422 
For a list of Karma Kagyu Centres worldwide, contact: 
Karma Triyana Dharmachakra 
352 Meads Mt Rd, Woodstock, New York 12498 
(914) 679-5906, email office@kagyu.org www.kagyu.org 
Kagyu Samye Ling Monastery & Tibetan Centre 
Eskdalemuir, Langholm, Dumfriesshire, Scotland, DG13 OQL 
(013) 873 73232, email scotland@samyeling.org www.samyeling.org 
53
Other publications from 
Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal 
The Life of the Buddha er The Four Noble Truths 
A Guide to Shamatha Meditation 
The Twelve Links of Interdependent Origination 
Teachings on the Practice of Meditation 
Progressive Stages of Meditation on Emptiness 
The Two Truths 
Ascertaining Certainty of the View 
Beautiful Song of Marpa the Translator 
Four Foundations of Buddhist Practice 
The Three Vehicles of Buddhist Practice 
The Middle Way Meditation Instructions 
An Introduction to Mahamudra Meditation 
An Overview of the Bardo Teachings 
The Five Buddha Families and the Eight Consciousnesses 
The Four Dharmas of Gampopa 
Journey of the Mind: teachings on the bardo 
Medicine Buddha Teachings 
The Essence of Creation e& Completion 
Showing the Path of Liberation 
Mahamudra Teachings 
The Aspiration Prayer of Mahamudra 
The Life of Tilopa e&* The Ganges Mahamudra 
For orders or catalogues, please contact: 
Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal 
PO Box 6259 Wellesley St, Auckland, NZ 
email: orders@greatliberation.org website www.greatliberation.org 
54
      
Long Life Prayer 
for 
Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche 
Karma Lodro, 
Splendour of the Teachings, 
May you remain steadfastly present, 
Your qualities of the glorious 
And good Dharma spreading 
as far as space can go. 
May your activity of Teaching 
And Practice be 
Universally victorious, 
And may the magnificance 
Of this triumph blaze forth. 
written by Situ Pema Wangchok Gyalpo 
       
Care of Dharma Books 
Dharma books contain the teachings of the Buddha; they have the power to 
protect against lower rebirth and to point the way to Liberation. Therefore, 
they should be treated with respect, kept off the floor and places where people 
sit or walk, and not stepped over. They should be covered or protected for 
transporting and kept in a high, clean place separate from more “ordinary” 
things. If it is necessary to dispose of Dharma materials, they should be burned 
with care and awareness rather than thrown in the trash. When burning Dharma 
texts, it is considered skilful to first recite a prayer or mantra, such as OM, AH, 
HUNG. Then you can visualize the letters of the text (to be burned) being 
absorbed into the AH, and the AH being aborbed into you. After that you can 
burn the texts. 
These considerations may be also kept in mind for Dharma artwork, as well as 
the written teachings and artwork of other religions.
PHILOSOPHY/ 
  
 
