TILOPA ’S
WISDOM
HIS LIFE AND  
T E A C H I N G S  O N T H E
G a n g e s  M a h a m u d r a
K h e n c h e n  T h r a n g u

Tilopas  Wisdom
His  Life  and Teachings  on the 
Ganges  Mahamudra
Khenchen  Thrangu
BASED  ON TRANSLATIONS  FROM  
O R A L  T E A C H I N G S  B Y
Lama  Yeshe  Gyamtso,  Jules  Levinson,  
and  Jerry  Morrell
Snow  Lion 
Boulder  
2019

Snow  Lion
An imprint  of  Shambhala  Publications,  Inc.
4720  Walnut  Street  
Boulder,  Colorado  80301  
www.shambhala.com
© 2019 by Khenchen  Thrangu
All rights  reserved.  No part  of  this book  may be reproduced  
in any form  or by any means,  electronic  or mechanical,  including  
photocopying,  recording,  or by any information  storage  and retrieval 
system,  without  permission  in writing  from  the publisher.
987654321
First  Edition
Printed  in the United  States  of  America
© This edition  is printed  on acid-free  paper  that meets 
the American  National  Standards  Institute  Z39.48  Standard.
O Shambhala  Publications  makes  every  effort  to print  on recycled  paper.
For more  information  please  visit  www.shambhala.com .
Snow  Lion  is distributed  worldwide  by Penguin  Random  House,  Inc., 
and its subsidiaries.
Library  of Congress  Cataloging -in-Pubucation  Data
Names:  Thrangu,  Rinpoche,  1933-  author.  | O’Hearn,  Peter,  1959-  translator.  | Levinson,
Jules  B., translator.  | Morrell,  Jerry,  translator.
Title:  Tilopa ’s wisdom: his life and teachings  on the Ganges  Mahamudra  / Khenchen  
Thrangu:  based  on translations  from  oral teachings  by Lama  Ycshe  Gyamtso,  Jules 
Levinson,  and  Jerry  Morrell.
Description:  First  edition.  | Boulder:  Snow  Lion,  2019.  | Includes  bibliographical 
references  and index.
Identifiers:  LCCN  2019007662  | ISBN  9781559394871  (pbk.:  alk. paper)
Subjects:  LCSH:  Tillopada,  988-1069.  | Buddhist  priests— India —Biography.  | 
Meditation —Tantric  Buddhism.  | Mahamudra  (Tantric  rite)
Classification:  LCC BQ590.157  T47 2019 | DDC 294.3/92092  [B]—dc23 
LC record  available  at https://lccn.l0c.g0v/2019007662

In this  world  there  have  been  many  beings,  chiefly  human  beings,  
but other  beings  as well, who have produced  great benefit  by 
offering  their intelligence,  their  mind,  their talents.  Tilopa  was 
like that. He was able to benefit  an immense  number  of beings  
through  his realization  and greatness.  For example,  if medicine  
that  can cure  a serious  illness  is kept  secret  and  not given  to those  
who  need  it, then  it will not benefit  anyone.  But if that  medicine  
is spread throughout the world  and made  available  to everyone,  
then  it will be of  great  benefit and will save many  lives.
So therefore,  in order  to understand  Tilopa  s contribution,  it 
is very  important  to understand  what  realization  means,  the wis­
dom  that  Tilopa  represents.  To understand  this,  we have  to look  
into the story  of Tilopa,  how he went  through difficulties,  how  
much  effort  he made,  how  he attained  understanding,  wisdom,  
and  qualities of  loving-kindness  and compassion.
—The Karmapa , Ogyen  Trinley  Dorje

Contents
Editor  s Preface  ix
'Part  One:  The  Life  ofTilopa
1. Introduction  3
2. Childhood  7
3. Renouncing  Samsara  and Meeting  His Teachers  11
4. Teaching  Mahamudra  at Pancapana  19
5. Receiving  Secret  Instructions  29
6. Gaining  Disciples  35
Part  Two : Teachings  on the Ganges  Mahamudra
7. Tilopa ’s Ganges  Mahamudra:  Root  Text  47
8. Introduction  55
9. The View  of  Mahamudra  in Six Metaphors  67
10. The Conduct  of Mahamudra  89
11. The Commitments  of Mahamudra  101
12. The Benefits  of  Practicing  Mahamudra  107

viii — CONTENTS
13. The Defects  of Not Practicing  Mahamudra  hi
14. How  to Practice  the Preliminaries  115
15. Howto  Practice  the Main  Body  of  Mahamudra  135
Afterword  155
Appendix  A: Tilopas  Six Points  for Mahamudra  157
Appendix  B: The Five  Buddha  Families  161
Appendix  C: The Eight  Consciousnesses  163
Glossary  165
Glossary  of  Tibetan  Terms  179
Notes  183
Annotated  Bibliography  191
Index  197
Biographical  Note  about  Khenchen  Thrangu  207

Editors  Preface
When  the Buddha  passed  away  2,500  years  ago, he left a vast collection  of 
teachings  from  his forty  years  of guiding  laypeople  and monastics.  There  
were several  main  teachings  of the Buddha  that were quite radical  given  
the religious  beliefs  and practices  dominant  in India  during  his lifetime.  
First,  the Buddha  denied  the existence  of  any creators)  of  the world,  a god, 
or gods,  who  must  be worshipped.  He taught  that everything  in this world  
came  about  because  of cause  and effect —much  like way that modern  sci­
entists  describe  the evolution  of living  creatures  on earth.  This contrasted  
greatly  with the prevalent  Hindu  culture  that posited  that the world  and 
everything  that happened  to the people  and animals  in it were  due to the 
actions  of the gods.  Second,  he taught  that all men and women  regardless  
of  their  nationality,  race,  or caste  could  practice  what  he taught  and eventu ­
ally reach  complete  enlightenment  or awakening.  This also differed  greatly  
from  Hinduism  in which  only  the men of the highest  Brahmin  caste  could  
learn Sanskrit  and then perform  religious  ceremonies  and achieve  awak ­
ening.  That  only  some  people could  learn  Sanskrit  was significant  because  
people  believed  that  while  conducting  a religious  ceremony  one  had to pro­
nounce  each  Sanskrit  syllable  absolutely  correctly  or the whole  ceremony,  or 
puja,  would  be defiled  and become  ineffective.  Third,  he taught  that  people  
should  live in harmony  with  their  environment,  which  means  that animals  
should  not be needlessly  killed.  This  was in conflict  with  the prevalence of 
animal  sacrifices  at the time.  Finally,  the Buddha  did not designate  a person  
to head  the Buddhist  “church, ” and  he did not give  any  instructions  on how  
they  should  set up a hierarchical  religion  after  his passing  away.  Rather,  the 
Buddha  laid down  a set of rules  for the ordained  Buddhist  sangha  and sug­
gested  a fairly democratic  way of making  decisions  and handling  disputes  
based  on respect,  love,  and compassion.
As the number  of Buddhists  grew  and the Buddhist  teachings spread  to

x — editor ’s preface
many  different  countries, Buddhism  began  slowly  to develop  two different  
methods  for achieving  awakening.  On the one hand,  monastic  universi ­
ties developed  where  a large number  of monks  from different  traditions  
including  Hindu  specialists  in the Vedas,  rhetoric,  medicine,  and so on 
congregated  and studied  together,  sharing  the culture  of India.  Many  pil­
grims  from Tibet  and China  visited  these  universities  and brought  back  
descriptions  of  these  universities  and  what  was taught  in them,  and actually  
brought  back  many  of  the texts  that  were  taught  there.  As a result,  we know  
who many  of the great  teachers  were and what  they taught.  This immense  
learning,  however,  was totally  unavailable  to the ordinary  person  in India  
who spoke  only their  local language  and therefore  did not know  Sanskrit,  
which  was the language  that most  of the Buddhist  Dharma  was taught  in. 
These  monastic  universities  were mostly  sponsored  by rich patrons  or the 
ruling  kings,  and they  were  mainly  organized  as feudal  organizations.
On the other  hand,  there  were  also the yogi  mendicants  who  were  said  to 
live “in the forest ” (but  more  likely  lived  outside  towns  and  larger  cities)  and 
who  followed  the siddha  tradition  of India;  they  taught  ordinary  people  in 
their  own  local  language.  The siddha  tradition  in India  goes back  to before  
the time  of  the Buddha.  Siddhas  were  wandering  religious  men  who  mainly  
engaged  in various  ascetic  practices.  Even today  we can see these  siddhas  
all across  India doing  ascetic  practices  such as not wearing  any clothing,  
standing  on only  one leg for great  lengths  of time,  rubbing  themselves  with  
ashes,  and so on. Since  the Buddha  had actually  engaged  in these  practices  
himself  for six years  and found  that they did not lead  to awakening,  Bud­
dhist  siddhas do not particularly  practice  asceticism.  Instead  they  attempt  
to reach  awakening  by breaking  all their conventional  conditioning and 
conceptual  thinking  and by acting  in unconventional  ways such as eating  
meat,  intermarrying  with members  of the lowest  castes,  insulting  officials  
and important  people,  and the like. The Buddhist  siddhas  that are best 
known  are called  mabasiddhas , and they  were made  famous  by a compila ­
tion of short  biographies  about  them  called  the Eighty-Four  Mabasiddhas  
(composed  by Abhayadatta,  who  lived  in the early  twelfth  century).  Tilopa  
and his main  disciple Naropa  are both considered  to be part of this group  
of  eighty-four  mahasiddhas.
Tilopa  (988-1069)  was born  in Bengal,  India.  Peter  Alan  Roberts  gives 
a rare physical  description  of Tilopa as “a solitary  dark-skinned  wanderer  
with bulging  eyes and long,  matted  hair. ”1 Tilopa  received  his name  from  
til, which  means  “sesame  seed ” in Sanskrit.  Because  the great  scholars,  or

editor ’s preface  — xi
panditas , worked  and practiced  in monastic  universities with great librar ­
ies, their  lives and works  were  much  better  documented than those  of the 
mahasiddhas  who  often  lived  away  from  civilization;  no one followed  them  
into the jungles  and small  towns  where  they taught  and wrote  down  any 
details  about  their  lives.  Also  this  was a time  when  dates  were  not  considered  
important.  In fact, the official  calendar  of Tibet  began  in 1067,  just two 
years  before the death  of Tilopa.  Because  we don ’t have  a documented  his­
tory  of  Tilopa ’s life, we have  many  conflicting  stories  about  him.  For exam ­
ple, the most  important  event  of  his life—when  he attained  enlightenment  
after  pounding  sesame  seeds  for many  years— is told differently  in several  
of his biographies:  Several  accounts  state that Tilopa  went  to a town  and 
asked to be chained  there.  He then  remained  there  for twelve  years  before  
reaching  realization.  The biographies  of Marpa  and Wangchuk  Gyaltsen  
tell the story  that Tilopa  was told by his guru  Matangi  to go to a town  and 
pound  sesame  seeds  during  the day and to be a procurer  for the prostitute  
Dharima  at night  without  telling  anyone  that he was a mahasiddha.  In a 
version  told by the Seventeenth  Karmapa,  based  on Taranatha ’s account,  
Tilopa  was living  in a monastery  as a celibate  monk  and left the monastery  
and began  living  with the prostitute  Dharima.  There  he pounded sesame  
seeds  during  the day and at night  practiced  Mahamudra  with  Dharima  and 
thus  reached  enlightenment. 2
In India,  the tenth  century  was a time  when  many  people  told elaborate  
stories  about  the powers  of siddhas,  and therefore many  Western  scholars  
have  dismissed  these  stories  outright.  However,  some  of  the stories  about  the 
powers  of siddhas  are true and  others  are intended  to be merely  symbolic.  
For  example,  in modern  times,  there  are a number  of  great  practitioners  who  
have  “traveled ” to another  dimension  and received  teachings  from  a famous  
but  long-dead  siddha  (or accomplished  one).  Upon  returning,  they  furiously  
write  down  these  teachings  and then  give them  to their  students.  Or real­
ized  teachers  will sometimes  know  exactly  what  is going  on somewhere  out 
of their  sight,  even as far away  as in a distant  country.  For example,  when  
Lama  Norlha,  who lives in New  York  State,  was visiting  the young  Seven ­
teenth  Karmapa  in Tibet  and describing  his center, the Karmapa  suddenly  
said, “What  is that  hole in your  backyard? ” The lama  was taken  aback  and 
said that the hole was to be a swimming  pool that he was building.  Other  
lamas  such  as Adzom  Rinpoche  and the Seventeenth  Karmapa  have  placed  
their  hands  on rocks  and melted  the surface  enough  to form  a fingerprint  
or a handprint.  Finally,  many  Buddhist  practitioners  have witnessed  the

xii — editor ’s preface
practice  of  thukdam>  in which  a lama  tells his students  that he is going  to 
die and  then  adopts  a perfect  meditation  posture  and remains  there  for days 
after his heart  and breathing  have stopped.  In normal  persons,  the body  
slumps  to the floor  at death  and the body  becomes  cold,  but for the prac­
titioner  of thukdam,  the heart  area (where  it is believed  the mind  resides)  
remains  warm  for days and the body  doesn ’t lose its upright  meditation  
posture.  These  siddhis  or “powers, ” which  are based  on meditation  practice,  
may  not be as great  as Tilopa ’s being  able to conjure  up a huge  army  (as one 
story  about  him has it), but they are powers  not presently  explainable  by 
modern  science.
Sometimes  the story  about  a siddha ’s powers  is intended  to be merely  
symbolic;  for example,  a story  about  a siddha  being burned  alive and yet 
being  unscathed  by the fire. This is a symbolic way of saying  that they  had 
mastered  the element  of fire. Or a story  that a siddha  was drowned  and yet 
survived  may  be a way  of  saying  that  they  had  mastered  the element  of water.  
It’s even  possible  that  a story  of  a siddha  creating  the illusion  of  a great  army  
symbolically  indicates  that they had mastered  the practice  of the illusory  
body  (Tib.gyii lu).
When  Thrangu  Rinpoche  was asked  about  these  miracles,  he said  that  in 
a sacred  biography  (Tib.  namtar),  it really  doesn ’t matter  where  the persons  
were  born,  where they  traveled, and so on, because  the stories  are presented  
to explain  how  that  siddha  achieved  enlightenment  and  that  is what  is really  
important. If  we study  these biographies,  we can learn  in a very  interesting  
and nonacademic  way  what  the path  to enlightenment  can be like and  how 
extraordinary  practitioners  attained  realization.  This  is why  I have  included  
Thrangu  Rinpoches  teachings  on Tilopa  s life in the first  part  of  this book.
The first biography  of Tilopa  was written  by Marpa  (1012-1097),  who 
received  the information  from  Tilopa  s only  major  pupil,  Naropa.  This  text 
has been translated  by Fabrizio  Torricelli  and Sangye  Naga  and published  
as The  Life  ofMahasiddha  Tilopa.  A second  major  biography  of Tilopa  was 
written  by Wangchuk  Gyaltsen  (1317-1405),  who  was a student  of  Tsangpa  
Heruka.  Wangchuk  Gyaltsen  collected  ten different  Tibetan  biographies  
of Tilopa  and assembled  them  into a single coherent  story.  This  biography  
has been  translated  into English  by Ives Waldo. A third  significant biogra ­
phy of Tilopa  was composed  by Pema  Karpo  (1527-1592)  in his Pekar  Ckd-  
jung  (History of the Dharma),  which  is the text that Thrangu  Rinpoche  
used  in his oral teachings  on Tilopa  s life, which  form  the basis  for some  of 
the chapters  in this book.  This book  has been translated  by both  Helmut

editor ’s preface  — xiii
Hoffman  and the Nalanda  Translation  Committee.  Finally,  Khenpo  Kon-  
chog  Gyaltsen  translated  Dorje  Dze Od ’s The Great  Kagyu  Masters , which  
recounts  the lives of the masters  of the Drikung  Kagyu  lineage  (Thrangu  
Rinpoche  is of  the Karma  Kagyu  lineage)  and that  has a fairly  long  retelling  
of  Tilopa ’s life and also of  his main  pupil,  Naropa.
The  second  part  of  this book  includes  the twenty-nine  stanzas  of  Tilopa ’s 
Ganges  Mahamudra,  followed  by Thrangu  Rinpoches  commentary  on it in 
eight  chapters.  The Ganges  Mahamudra  is a doha (song),  a form  of poetry  
written  in rhyming  couplets.  Since  the mahasiddhas  taught  in the language  
spoken  by the people  they  lived  among,  and Tilopa  was from  Bengal,  India,  
where  people  spoke  the Apabhramsha  language,  this doha  was originally  
written  in Apabhramsha.  Dohas  were not ordinary  songs  or poetry,  how ­
ever.  They  were  sung  spontaneously  by siddhas  as an expression  of their  spir­
itual  realization.  So a more  accurate  translation  of  doha  would  be “spiritual  
song ” or “a song  of realization. ” They  were  not like a poem  that you might  
write  down,  then come  back to later in order  to edit and improve  it. The 
initial  composition  was final.  However,  since  these  dohas  were passed  on 
orally  from  teacher  to student,  several  different  versions  of  a doha  may  exist.
The term doha comes  from Sanskrit  where  do comes  from the word  
meaning  “two, ” which  refers  to the two  lines  forming  the rhyming  couplets.  
When  these  couplets  were  translated  into  Tibetan,  however,  they  were  often  
transformed  into four-line  verses  that did not rhyme.  The Tibetan  transla ­
tions  usually  have  the same  number  of  syllables  per  line so they  can be sung  
to many  different  melodies.
Saraha,  who most likely  lived in Bengal,  which  is in the eastern  part 
of India,  at least a century  before  Tilopa,  is credited  with giving the first 
recorded  teachings  on Mahamudra  in his Three  Cycles  of Doha.  Saraha  was 
the king ’s main  Brahmin  and led an exemplary  life. However,  one day he 
met a lower-caste  woman  who  was making  arrows  in the marketplace, and 
she ended  up teaching  Mahamudra  to Saraha.  He began  living  with her 
and started  to act more  like a mahasiddha  than the king ’s head  religious  
leader.  Some  citizens  of  the kingdom  then  came  to Saraha  and  asked  him  to 
return  to the palace; Saraha ’s reply  was The Citizens  Doha,  which  described  
Mahamudra  meditation.  Then  the queen  came  to ask him to return,  and 
he replied  with The  Queens  Doha.  Finally,  the king  himself  came  and made  
the same  request,  and  Saraha  replied  with  The  King ’s Doha,  again  describing  
Mahamudra.
The next important  Mahamudra texts that we know  of were taught by

xiv — editor ’s preface
Tilopa,  who was also born in Bengal,  where  there  were several  monastic  
universities such  as Somapuri.  Some  of the biographies say that  Tilopa  vis­
ited,  and may  have  studied  at, one of  these  monasteries.  He most  likely  also 
spent  a great  deal  of  time  teaching  in small  towns  and forests  and cremation  
grounds.  As already  mentioned,  the several  accounts  of Tilopa  s life do not 
always  agree  with  each  other.
According  to James  Robinson,  Tilopa  has eight  different  teachings  in the 
Tengyur.  This  volume  includes  translations  of  two  of his most  famous  dohas  
on Mahamudra  along  with  Thrangu  Rinpoche  commentaries  on them.  The 
first  is a four-verse  teaching  that  Tilopa  gave  at the Pancapana  marketplace  
where  he attained  enlightenment.  The second  is the Ganges  Mahamudra  
that Tilopa  taught  to his most  prominent  student,  Naropa,  on the banks  
of the Ganges.  The Ganges  Mahamudra  is by far his most  famous teaching,  
and  it has been  translated  at least  a dozen  times.  Tilopa  s third  most  import ­
ant  work  was  the teachings  that  he gave  Naropa  called  Instructions  of the Six 
Yogas  (Skt.  Saddharmo-padesha,  Tib. Chos  druggi  man  ngag).  These  teach ­
ings were systematized  and expanded  by his student  Naropa  and are now  
popularly  known  as The SixDharmas  of Naropa  (Tib.  Na ro’i chos  drug),  or 
The Six Yogas  of Naropa.  While  Thrangu  Rinpoche  has not publicly  given  
teachings on The SixDharmas  of Naropa,  he does teach  them  in his three-  
year  retreat  programs.
What  is so remarkable  about  the Ganges  Mahamudra  is that a thousand  
years  ago it laid out the practice  of Mahamudra  in just twenty-nine  verses. 
Moreover,  Tilopa  s description  of how to engage  in Mahamudra  is almost  
identical  to the descriptions  of Mahamudra  practice  that  have  been  given  by 
contemporary  Tibetan  masters,  including  Thrangu  Rinpoche.  The Maha ­
mudra  tradition  s ability  to keep  its practice  free from  adulteration  for ten 
centuries  is quite  remarkable  especially  if  we compare,  for example,  how  the 
Christian  church  changed  its doctrine  and practice  radically  in its first one 
thousand  years.
The  reason  why  Mahamudra  has remained  unchanged  is that  it was trans ­
mitted  in a special  way. The persons  who mastered  it found  it to be real 
and profound  because  it was not based  on conceptual  thought  or cultural  
conditioning  but on carefully  examining  the mind.  Since  all humans  have  a 
mind  that  is readily  accessible  and this mind  is much  deeper  than  its super ­
ficial  thoughts  and cultural  concepts,  it is available  to anyone interested  in 
examining  it. The transmission  began  by encouraging  people  to practice  
Mahamudra.  If a practitioner  fully  realized Mahamudra,  then the  teacher

editor ’s PREFACE  — XV
would  allow  that  person  to become  a teacher.  Moreover,  the many  students  
who practiced  Mahamudra  but did not reach  full awakening  did not lose 
anything  thereby  because  the blessings  of doing  the practice  helped  them  
along  the path  of  full enlightenment.
The Origins  of This Book
In 1988 the Nalanda  Translation  Committee  asked  Thrangu  Rinpoche  to 
teach  on Tilopa  because  they  were  translating  an independent  biography  on 
him. 3 Thrangu  Rinpoche  gave these  teachings  in Boulder,  Colorado,  that 
year, with  Jerry Morrell  doing  the oral translating.  Namo  Buddha  Publi ­
cations was fortunate  to receive  an audio  copy  of these  teachings,  and the 
audio  copy  was transcribed  and edited  by Gaby  Hollmann  in 1990.
Thrangu  Rinpoche  also gave teachings  on Tilopa  in Nepal  in 1991 while  
doing  a pilgrimage  to Lumbini,  the birthplace  of the Buddha,  with  Jules  
Levinson  translating.
In 1994  Thrangu  Rinpoche  also  gave  teachings  at Thrangu  Tashi  Choling  
in Nepal  on The  Song  of Tilopa,  which  was the teaching  on Mahamudra  that 
Tilopa  gave at the Pancapana  marketplace.  These  teachings  were  translated  
by Lama  Yeshe  Gyamtso.
Then  in 1998  Thrangu  Rinpoche  gave  a series  of teachings  in Vancouver,  
with  Lama  Yeshe  Gyamtso  translating,  on the Ganges  Mahamudra.  For this 
volume,  I have  used  Lama  Yeshe  Gyamtso  s translation  of the root  verses,  as 
well as his oral translations  of  Thrangu  Rinpoche ’s commentary.
Finally,  I have  included  Tilopa  s famous  six-line  teaching  on Mahamudra  
meditation  in appendix  A, which  includes  Thrangu  Rinpoche  s commen ­
tary  on it that  was orally  translated  by Jules  Levinson and the full spiritual  
song  from  which  the six-line  teaching  was taken.
Since  Thrangu  Rinpoche  emphasized  certain  points  in one teaching  and 
other  points  in others,  I decided  to compose  a single  volume  of these  teach ­
ings on Tilopa  that would  make  them  more  useful  to the practitioner  who 
desires  to learn more  about  Mahamudra  meditation  and where  it comes  
from.
Acknowledgments
I would  like to thank  Jerry  Morrell  for translating  the teachings  given  in 
Boulder,  Jules Levinson  for translating  the teachings  given  in Nepal  and

xvi — editor ’s preface
for translating  the six-line  Mahamudra  teaching  in appendix  A, and  Lama  
Yeshe  Gyamtso  for translating  the Ganges  Mahamudra  teachings.  I would  
like to thank  Gaby  Hollmann  for transcribing  and editing  the Boulder  
teachings  and Tilopa ’s Song  of Realization  and Clarke  Fountain  for edit­
ing, and Margaret  Neuman  for transcribing,  the Nepal  teachings.  I would  
also like to thank  Lama Tashi  of Shenpen  Osel magazine  for providing  us 
with  additional  materials  on the Ganges  Mahamudra.  Also,  I would  like to 
thank  Michael  Wakoffat  Shambhala  Publications  for his editing.  Finally,  
this book  would  not have  been  possible  if it weren ’t for the oral translations  
provided  by  Jerry  Morrell,  Jules  Levinson,  and Lama  Yeshe  Gyamtso.
Clark  Johnson,  PhD

PART  ONE
The Life ofTilopa

Tilopa  and Vajradhara.  Tilopa  received  his teachings from Vajradhara  through  
a wisdom  dakini.  He wears  a meditation  belt and sits on a deerskin.  Behind  
him is a treasure  vase, and in the sky a dakini  is raising  a victory  banner.  
Drawing  by Jamyong  Singhe,  courtesy  of Namo  Buddha  Publications.

I
Introduction
A spiritual  biography  of a great  mahasiddha  or any great  lama  is called  a 
namtar*  in Tibetan,  which  means  “a hagiography ” or “a story  of  realization. ” 
This type  of  spiritual  biography  is not a biography  that discusses  when  and 
where  a person  was born and other  biographical  details  but rather  a story  
of the events  that led to the individuals  realization.  A spiritual biography  
discusses  how  that individual  began  to practice  meditation,  how he or she 
applied  themselves  to the Dharma,  what  methods  that  person  used  to attain  
realization,  and how  this realization  led to the helping  of  others.  Since  they  
are stories  of  complete  liberation  from  all suffering, they  are called  namtar>  
with the syllable  nam meaning “liberation ” and the syllable  tar meaning  
complete.
Spiritual  biographies  usually  have few references  to the more  mundane  
things  of a mahasiddhas  life, such  as what  kind  of  clothes  were  worn,  what  
kind  of food  was eaten,  or where  he or she went.  The reason for this is that 
the main  purpose  of a spiritual  biography  is to show  the student  of Bud­
dhism  how  to practice  the Dharma  and to illustrate  the results  of  practicing  
the Dharma  by using  the example  of  an individual  who  has actually  attained  
buddhahood.
Many  people  say that Tibetan  stories  and spiritual  biographies  present  
only the good deeds  and qualities  of an individual,  leaving  out all their  
bad deeds.  One Tibetan author,  Gendun  Choephel,  who  wrote  The White  
Annals , makes  the point  that  Tibetan  stories  and  biographies  don ’t present  
the complete  truth  and often  gloss  over the faults  of lamas.  There  is some  
truth  in this, but the purpose  of a spiritual  biography  is for the student  to 
discover  what  the practice  of Dharma is actually  like, what  meditation  is

4 THE LIFE OF TILOPA
like, and how  love and compassion  are expressed  by the great  practitioners.  
So the purpose  of a namtar  is to inspire  the student,  and this is why they  
present  all the marvelous qualities  of the lamas  and leave  out the negative  
ones.
Western  scholars  complain,  “How  can these  biographies  be taken  seri­
ously?  They don ’t provide  a birth  date or mention  the actual  places  the 
mahasiddha  lived  and taught  and other  details. ” This  is true,  but why  do we 
need  to know  when  these  people  lived?  Perhaps  Tilopa  lived  in the seventh  
century,  perhaps  in the eleventh  century.  But who actually  cares?  Tilopa  
was not an ordinary  human  being  anyway.  We should  remember  Tilopa ’s 
and Naropa ’s great  kindness  and the great  efforts  they made  to propagate  
the teachings  of Mahamudra  and the Six Yogas  of Naropa, 5 making  them  
available  to everyone  in Tibet,  and now  to students  all over  the world.
The Buddha  gave numerous  teachings  of the sutras  and the tantras that 
make  up the eighty-four  thousand  classes of Dharma.  He taught  the entire  
path  of  Dharma  in an extremely  vast  way.  However,  ifwe  were  to try to study  
all these  sutras  and tantras,  it would  be very difficult  to extract  their  pith 
instructions  on how to practice  and discover how  to actually  travel  on the 
path. 6 The great  mahasiddha  Tilopa,  however,  extracted  the very  essence  of 
these  vast teachings  of  the sutras  and tantras  and explained  exactly  how  we 
should  develop  our practice. An analogy  is that if we go into a forest  in the 
high  mountains,  we may  be aware  that the forest  is full of medicine.  How ­
ever, this knowledge  is useless  unless  we also know  which  particular  plant  
is a medicinal  plant  and  which  particular  illness  can be cured  by that  plant.
Tilopa  (988-1069)  was an emanation  of Chakrasamvara.  He practiced  
the Dharma  completely  and  attained  enlightenment.  Tilopa  was not able to 
see the supreme  nirmanakaya  emanation  of the Buddha  Shakyamuni,  who 
had  passed  away  many  centuries  before. 7 However,  the dharmakaya  is replete  
with the unbelievable  power  of compassion  that manifests  continuously  
to all sentient  beings.  This dharmakaya  aspect,  as well as the compassion  
aspect  of the sambhogakaya,  goes on for the benefit  of all sentient  beings.  
Tilopa  had  direct  experience  of  this dharmakaya  aspect  and received  all the 
pith instructions  from  the buddha  Vajradhara  on how to practice  directly.  
Tilopa  was different  from  the other  Kagyu  lineage  holders  such as Marpa  
and Milarepa  because  Tilopa  was an actual  emanation  of Chakrasamvara  
and  therefore  had  a direct  experience  of Vajradhara.  Marpa,  in contrast,  was 
an ordinary  person  who  gained  enlightenment  through  his practice.  How ­
ever,  Tilopa  still had  physical  limitations  due to his karmically  conditioned

INTRODUCTION 5
body.  The traditional  example  of this is the  garuda,  a bird  that  is born  with  
wings  and has the power  to fly but is still contained  in a fine envelope  of 
an eggshell.  In the same  way, until  that last piece  of eggshell  of his karmi ­
cally  conditioned  physical form  was broken,  Tilopa  could  not develop  full 
realization.  Without  a doubt,  Tilopa  was an emanation  of Chakrasamvara.  
However,  because  of  the obscurations  and  disturbing  emotions  possessed  by 
most  sentient  beings,  they  were  not able  to perceive  the form  of  Chakrasam ­
vara  directly.
The deities  Chakrasamvara,  Vajrayogini,  and Chenrezik  are not indi­
vidual  entities  like living  beings.  The best way to understand  them is to 
see them  as the dharmata  (the true nature  of reality),  the completely  vast 
state of emptiness  that  is replete  with the guru  s wisdom  and has extreme  
power  and luminous  clarity. 8 The very nature  of this luminous  clarity  is 
compassion.  There  is a great  amount  of power  in the completely  empty  space  
of dharmata.  That  power  is such that without  any particular  intention  or 
direction  by any kind  of thought,  it will manifest  to benefit  sentient  beings  
in a myriad  of  different  ways.  This  emanation  could  be as Chakrasamvara,  as 
Vajrayogini,  or as a king,  an animal,  a queen,  or even  a beggar.  The  power  of 
this  luminous  clarity  and  compassion  is such  that  without  making  some  sort 
of  decision,  for example,  “I will manifest  in this way to benefit  so and so,” it 
just  happens  spontaneously.  This  is how  we should  understand  the nature  of 
these  deities.  They  have  arisen  from  the power  of  luminous  clarity  and  com­
passion  of the buddha  nature,  which  is the emptiness  of dharmata  itself. 9
So Chakrasamvara  emanated  as an impure  being,  an ordinary  mani ­
festation,  being  born among  humans  as Tilopa.  This emanation  was vis­
ible to human  beings  who needed  to be taught  how to gain liberation.  If 
Chakrasamvara  were to emanate  gloriously  in the human  realm  without  
relying  on a particular  teacher  or doing  any  particular  practice  or following  
any particular  tradition,  human  beings  would  think,  “Well,  this is some  
kind  of magical  being  from  outside  this world,  and it isn’t possible  for me 
to be like him in any way. ” In India,  the great  mahasiddha  Tilopa  took  up 
the practice  of Dharma  and achieved  enlightenment.  He brought  the pith 
instructions  of  Mahamudra  and  the Six Dharmas  of Naropa  into  our  world.  
These  teachings  went  directly  from  him  to Naropa,  and  were  then  carried  to 
Tibet  by Marpa,  where  they  flourished  widely.  Even  today,  a thousand  years  
later, these  very same teachings  are spreading  throughout  the world  and 
even to Western  countries.  This is a sign of the great  wisdom,  compassion,  
and power  of the mahasiddha  Tilopa.

6 THE LIFE OF TILOPA
The great translator  Marpa  received  the transmission  of Mahamudra  
meditation  and the Six Dharmas  of Naropa  mainly  from Tilopa  s stu­
dent  Naropa.  He received  these  in the form  of practicing  the Hevajra  tan- 
tra and, more  specifically,  the Chakrasamvara  tantra.  In the mandala  of 
Chakrasamvara,  Marpa  received  the essence  of skillful  means  (Skt. upaya ) 
as Chakrasamvara  and the essence  of wisdom  (Skt. prajna)  as Vajrayo-  
gini. The mandala  of the union  of skillful  means  and wisdom  is the basis  
of the Chakrasamvara  tantra.  When  we visualize  ourselves  as Hevajra  or 
Chakrasamvara  in the practice  of these  tantras,  we are engaging  in the cre­
ation  stage  of meditation.  The meditation  on the Six Dharmas  of  Naropa  is 
the completion  stage  of the Chakrasamvara  tantra. 10

z
Childhood
Tilopa  was born  in eastern  India  in 988. When  Tilopa  was a young  boy, he 
had  the special  qualities  of  being  extremely  compassionate,  kind,  and  loving.  
He was a cowherd  and  played  in the forest  without  a care.  At that time,  the 
great  Nagarjuna  was out  walking  in the  vicinity. 11 He had  the special  insight  
that  in this region there  was someone  who  was an ideal  vessel to receive the 
Vajrayana  teachings.  Pondering  this,  he proceeded  to the place  between  the 
town  and the river  where  Tilopa  was taking  care of  water  buffaloes.  Nagar ­
juna  wanted  to cross  the river and pretended  not to know  where to ford it. 
He went  to a point  in the river  with  rapids  and high  waves  and pretended  
that he was going  to walk  into the raging  river.  Tilopa  came  running  up to 
him  and  said,  “I will  help  you  by carryingyou  across.  There  is no need  for  you 
to be afraid  or to trouble  yourself. ” Nagarjuna  instantly  saw that this child  
had great  potential  for developing  intense  devotion  and compassion  and 
that  he had the capacity  for extreme  courage  and diligence. He allowed  the 
boy to carry  him  into the river.  Although  Tilopa  was  young  and  Nagarjuna  
was an adult,  by his miraculous  power  Nagarjuna  made  his body  so light  
that the boy could  carry  him quite  easily.
Tilopa  carried  him into the river  and  when  they  got to the middle  of the 
river,  Nagarjuna  used his miraculous  powers  again  to make  the river rise 
very  high.  The raging  torrent  almost  carried  the boy away  so that he was 
about  to disappear  beneath  the waves.  The  young  Tilopa  didn ’t think,  “Oh, 
I’ve made  a mistake.  We shouldn ’t have tried this, ” but rather  developed a 
firm  determination  to get to the other  side and  wasn ’t afraid  at all.
Nagarjuna  tested  him even further  and exclaimed,  “All is lost. We are 
done  for. There  is nothing  to grab  on to. We will never  get to the other  side 
of the river. ” But Tilopa  developed  even greater  determination  and said to

8 THE LIFE OF TILOPA
Nagarjuna,  “Just  hold  on tight  to my neck,  and I’ll get you to the other  side. 
Don ’t worry.  We are going  to do this. ” So Nagarjuna  saw that Tilopa  had 
great  courage  and potential and  was indeed  a fit vessel  for all the Dharma  
teachings.
On another  occasion,  Nagarjuna  was  again  traveling  in the neighborhood  
and came  upon  young  Tilopa  playing  that he was a king.  He was sitting  at 
the bottom  of a tree  with  a couple  of  girls  pretending  to be his queens,  four 
little  children  pretending  to be his inner  court,  other  children  pretending  
to be the outer  court,  and twenty-five  children  acting  as his subjects.  Seeing  
this, Nagarjuna  came up to them smiling.  The young  Tilopa  jumped  up 
and prostrated  to Nagarjuna  and said, “How  are you? Did you have a hard  
time  on your  journey? ” Nagarjuna  said,  “I have  the means  by which  you can 
become  a real  king. ” The  young  Tilopa  responded,  “Oh please,  you must  tell 
me how! ” Nagarjuna  then spent  seven  days consecrating  a special  treasure  
vase. He wrote  down  on a piece  of paper  the name  of the king,  the names  
of the queens,  what  kinds  of ministers  he would  require,  and what  kind  of 
wealth  and riches  would  be needed  by the kingdom,  and  put the paper  into 
the treasure  vase. He then gave it to Tilopa  and said, “Say ‘I will be king ’ 
three  times  into this vase. ” Tilopa  took the vase, put it to his mouth,  and 
shouted  inside  it, “I will be king ” three  times.
It so happened  that  the king  of that  region  suddenly  became  totally  exas­
perated  with  his kingdom  and decided  he must  give  it up and  go somewhere  
else. This was due to the great  blessings  and power  of Nagarjuna  and the 
magic  treasure  vase. Furthermore,  this thought  of leaving  came  to the king  
without anyone  else knowing  about  it. He dressed  himself  as an ordinary  
person  and  just left.
This  kingdom  also had a most  extraordinary  elephant  who  had  clairvoy ­
ant powers  and  would  predict  events  in the kingdom.  For instance,  if there  
were  any threats from  enemies,  the elephant  would  plow  up the earth and 
toss it around.  When  a plague  of some  kind  would  threaten  the kingdom,  
the elephant  would  cry and shed  many  tears.  When  good  things  happened  
in the kingdom,  the elephant  would  rush  into the local  park  and  pull  up the 
flowers  and throw  them  all around.  This  elephant  was also responsible  for 
determining  the future  king.  The elephant  would  pick  up a crowning  vase 
with  its trunk  and  place  it on the head  of  the person  who  was next  to be king.
Not many  people  had noticed  that their king had gone. One day the 
elephant  went  to the vase  he used  to crown  the next  king,  picked  it up, and 
began  marching  out of the palace  toward  the forest  where  young  Tilopa

CHILDHOOD 9
was still playing  his game  of royal  court.  All the ministers  and people  ran 
behind  the elephant,  muttering  to each  other,  “What ’s going  on? Either  the 
king  is dying  or our kingdom  is finished. ” They  followed  the elephant  to the 
group  of  children,  and the elephant  placed  the vase on top of  Tilopa ’s head.  
Because  the people  of the kingdom  believed  completely  in the elephant ’s 
choice,  they took the young  boy back to the palace  and placed  him upon  
the jeweled  throne  and made  him their  king.
At first the ministers  and later  all the subjects  treated  this boy-king  with  
suspicion.  They  didn ’t obey  his commands  because  they  thought  that  he was 
an ordinary  person  and his selection  was actually  some  sort of mistake.  So 
Tilopa  prayed  to Nagarjuna  for guidance,  and Nagarjuna  instructed  Tilopa  
to mount  his elephant,  take  a sword  in one hand,  go out into the park,  slap 
the trees in the park,  and then tell them  to go to war. Tilopa  did this, and 
when  he slapped  the trees, the trees turned  into warriors,  ready  to go to 
war.  When  the subjects  and ministers  saw this, they  thought,  “Oh, this is a 
great  king  with incredible  merit ” and brought  him back  to the palace  and 
accepted  him as their  true king. 12
Another  time,  a city  in Tilopa ’s kingdom  was approached  by what  looked  
like  a horde  of  Persian  merchants.  They  arrived  on horseback  dressed  as ordi­
nary  merchants  with  big  packs  on the backs  of  their  animals.  The  people  and 
ministers  of the kingdom  saw them  and didn ’t give them  another  thought.  
However,  they  were  actually  Persian  warriors  disguised  as merchants.  When  
they stopped  in front  of the city, they got off their animals,  undid  their  
packs,  put on all their  armor,  and prepared  to advance  into the city.
At this point  everyone  in the kingdom  was terrified  that there  would  
be a great  war and they  would  be destroyed.  But Tilopa  told them,  “Don ’t 
be afraid.  I’ll take care of it.” He went  out in front  of this horde  of Persian  
warriors  with his mantle,  holding  a stick  with a globe  on it in one hand  
and his sword  in the other.  He stood  before  the approaching  army  and an 
incredible  light  radiated  from  his mantle,  dazzling  all the Persian  warriors  
so they couldn ’t look in his direction.  Then  Tilopa  held up his sword  and 
brandished  it until many  soldiers  came flying  out of it, scaring  the Per­
sian enemy  completely  away. After  that, the subjects  and ministers  were  
extremely  happy  with  their  king  and celebrated  and rejoiced.
This concludes  the second  chapter  on the childhood  of Tilopa,  which  
tells how  the poor  cowherd  became  a king.  This chapter  shows  us that one 
does not have  to become  poor  and be an ascetic  to practice  the Dharma.

3
Renouncing  Samsara  and  
Meeting  His Teachers
The  outer  action  of  any  mahasiddha  has three  stages.  The first  stage  is called  
the “completely  virtuous  stage, ” the second  is called  the “stage  of  vanquish ­
ing negative  behavior, ” and the third  stage  is called  the “victorious  in all 
actions. ” A mahasiddha  goes through  these  stages  one by one.  The first is 
called  the “completely  virtuous  stage ” because  the beginner  must  take  up the 
practice  of  being  extremely  peaceful  and  calm  and  carefully  watch  his or her 
actions  by having  extremely  controlled  and noble  behavior.  The beginner  
who  engages  in this behavior  is able to advance  along  the path  and then  at a 
certain  point  he or she must  enter  what  is called  “vanquishing  behavior ” or 
tiilshuk  in Tibetan.  The  syllable  till means  “to vanquish ” or “to subdue ” and 
refers  to subduing  ones  disturbing  emotions  (Skt.  kleshas ), especially  ones  
arrogance,  which  is to be completely  subdued  by the practice.  The syllable  
shuk  means  “entering. ”
So in this second  stage,  the practitioners  actually  submit  themselves  to 
conditions  such  as rage  or desire  that  would  normally  evoke  disturbing  con­
sequences.  In the first  stage  of  completely  virtuous  behavior,  beginners  avoid  
these  situations,  but in the vanquishing  stage,  meditators  actually  seek  them  
out. The meditators  have to destroy  their  arrogance,  pride,  and hatred  by 
throwing  themselves  into  situations  that  evoke  a response  that  allows  them  
to work  with  these  emotions.  The third  stage  of  “victorious  in all actions ” is 
the final  expression  of total  fearlessness;  a total  lack  of any inhibition  about  
anything  that is done.  An example  of this third  kind  of behavior  would  be 
to fearlessly  ride on the back  of an incensed  tigress.  This stage  is the final  
expression  of realization.

II THE LIFE OF TILOPA
The story  proceeds  with  Tilopa  abandoning  his life as a king  and becom ­
ing a monk and  entering  the Foundation  path.  This took  place  when,  as a 
king,  he developed  great  revulsion  for samsara.  Settingup  his own  son as the 
royal  heir,  Tilopa  left the kingdom  and  went  to a cemetery  called  Somapuri  
where  there  was a temple  erected  over a spontaneously  arisen  form  of the 
heruka, 13 At the time of Tilopa,  this temple  was considered  to be holy by 
both  Buddhists  and non-Buddhists  alike.  There  Tilopa  received  full ordi­
nation  as a monk  (Skt. bhikshu ) and resided  in Somapuri  for a long time  
practicing  diligently.  At this point,  Tilopa  began  practicing  the first stage  
of completely  virtuous  behavior  by maintaining his vows as a monk  and 
studying  very  diligently.
Tilopa  Begins  Vajrayana  Meditation
However,  one day Tilopas meditation  was interrupted by a very ugly hag 
who had a bluish-gray  complexion  and yellow-colored  hair who suddenly  
appeared  in front  of him. She distracted  him by asking  him what  he was 
reading.  It was the Prajnaparamita,  and she asked,  “Would  you like to 
understand  and directly  experience  the meaning  of the Prajnaparamita? ” 
At that moment,  Tilopa  recognized  that she was a real dakini  and said to 
her, “Yes, I would  like to really  understand  the meaning  of this teaching.  
I want to  understand  it directly  ” The dakini  then said to him, “Although  
what  you have been studying  is the pure and perfect  teaching  of the Bud­
dha, it requires  a great deal of hardship  to actually  attain  fruition.  To 
attain  buddhahood,  you must practice  virtuous  behavior  for many  life­
times.  This is a path  with  many  obstacles, and it is a difficult  path  to travel,  
taking  a great deal of time. The teachings  I have to teach  you are of the 
fruition  tantra.  With  this practice,  you can attain  fruition  within  one, 
three,  or at most  seven  lifetimes.  This  practice  is very easy to do, and there  
are few obstacles  on this path.  I am going  to let you enter  into the secret  
Mantrayana. 14
The dakini  transformed  herself  into the mandala  of Chakrasamvara  in 
the sky in front  of  Tilopa  and gave  him the pith instructions  of the creation  
and completion  stages  of practice.  In the creation  stage,  we visualize  our­
selves  as the deity  and the purpose  of this practice  is to destroy  our current  
neurotic  fixation  on gross  and  mundane  phenomena.  Since  we can develop  a 
fixation  upon  the deity  itself,  the dakini  then  taught  Tilopa  the pith  instruc ­
tions  of the completion  stage,  which  is basically  the instruction  on how  to

RENOUNCING  SAMSARA 13
dissolve  the immeasurable  palace  of the mandala  into the deity,  the deity  
into a seed syllable,  and the seed syllable  into emptiness.  With  these  two 
pith instructions,  Tilopa  attained  a degree  of realization  and the dakini  
said,  “Now  throw  out your  bhikshu  ordination  (monks  vows)  and go about  
acting  like a madman,  practicing  in secret  so that nobody  knows  what  you 
are doing. ” Then  the dakini  vanished  into the sky.
The dakini  who bestowed  these instructions  and empowerments  on 
Tilopa  was called  Karpo  Sangmo.  The reason  for doing  this second  stage  of 
vanquishing  behavior  of acting  like a madman  is that one has to test ones  
samadhi  by enduring the bad conditions  that this practice  places  one in, 
such as being  thrown  in jail, being  beaten  up and robbed,  and so on. One 
combines  the experience  of these  unfavorable  conditions  with  the samadhi  
to experience  the power  of ones samadhi.  This vanquishing  behavior  is a 
very  powerful  method  to eliminate  ones  neurotic  conceptions.
This  part  of  Tilopa  s biography  corrects  the notion  that  people  can attain  
enlightenment  by themselves  and they  don ’t need  a teacher.  Tilopa  took  a 
dakini  as a teacher.  That  is why  Marpa  in his commentary  on this part of 
Tilopa  s life wrote,  “He received  the blessing  from  the great  dakini Karpo  
Sangmo  and she gave  him the four  empowerments. ”
The Four  Empowerments  of Karpo  Sangmo
The first  empowerment  is called  the “vase  empowerment, ” which  points  out 
that the nature  of our five aggregates  (Skt. skandhas)  is actually  the five 
buddha  families. 15 There  are five aspects  of  the vase  empowerment:  the vase 
empowerment  of Akshobhya,  the crown  empowerment  of Ratnasambhava,  
the vajra  empowerment  of Amitabha,  the bell  empowerment  of Amoghasid-  
dhi, and the name  empowerment  of  Vairochana.  Through  these  five stages  
of the vase  empowerment,  we recognize  the five aggregates  as being  the five 
buddha  families.
The second  empowerment  is called  the “secret  empowerment, ” and this 
takes  place  through  the actual  experience  of tasting  and swallowing  the 
healing  nectar  (Skt.  amrita ) that is passed  out in the empowerment.  If we 
are completely  receptive  and swallow  this amrita, 16 then all the knots  and 
blockages  within  the subtle  channels  (Skt. nadis)  in the body  and the life 
force (Skt.  prana)  are untied  or liberated.  With  this empowerment,  if we 
are receptive  to it, we will experience  an extremely  even  flow  of the energy  
within  the body.  This  is the empowerment  of  the energy  flow,  the channels.

14 THE LIFE OF TILOPA
and the energy  drops  within  the body,  and especially  the flow  of the mantra  
itself. 17
The third  empowerment  is called  the “knowledge  and wisdom  empow ­
erment, ” in which  we actually  experience  great  bliss.  By experiencing  great  
bliss,  we recognize that it is inseparable  from  the nature  of mind,  that it is 
emptiness.  So we attain  an experience  called  “bliss-emptiness. ”
The fourth  empowerment  is called  the “empowerment  of the word, ” 
which  explains  the real nature  of  wisdom itself.  These  four  empowerments  
are called  “ripening  empowerments ” because  when  we receive  these  empow ­
erments,  this does  not mean  that  we have attained  all the stages  and never  
need  to practice  anymore.  Rather,  ripening  empowerments  should  be taken  
as symbolic  moments  that eventually  lead to the fruition  of our practice.  
Having  received  these  empowerments,  we should  feel that  we have  had the 
great  fortune  of receiving  the empowerments  and these  empowerments  are 
connected  with the full realization  of these  empowerments  with  further  
practice.
Tilopa  Meets  Matangi
After  practicing  the pith instructions  for a long  time,  Tilopa  found  that he 
had reached  a point  where  he could  progress  no further.  He wanted  to go to 
southern  India  to find  Nagarjuna  once  more. To  do this, he began  walking  
through  the  jungle.  In the  jungle,  he saw  a beautiful  straw  hut and  wondered  
who  lived  there.  Inside  he found  a yogi  who  had no food,  utensils,  or clothes.  
Tilopa  said to him, “What  are you doing? ” The yogi replied,  “I am teach ­
ing Dharma  to thcgandbarvas  (celestial  musicians  and spirits  who live off 
smell).  I was told  to teach  the gandharvas  by the great  Nagarjuna  himself.  
I have nothing  here. ” Tilopa asked  him, “Who  feeds  you? ” He answered,  
“All the nature  spirits  and the deities  of the forest  bring  me food. ” Tilopa  
then inquired,  “What  is your name? ” and the yogi replied,  “My name  is 
Matangi ” and  he told  Tilopa  that  Nagarjuna  was deceased  and had entered  
parinirvana.
Tilopa  asked  Matangi  to accept  him  as his student,  and  Matangi  accepted  
him. Matangi  then created  the mandala  of Guhyasamaja  and gave  him all 
the pith instructions  of the creation  and completion  stages  of this tantra.  
The Chakrasamvara  tantra  that  Tilopa  had received  from  the dakini  Karpo  
Sangmo  was from the mother  tantra.  The instructions  of Sangvadhupa  
from Matangi  were from the father  tantra.  The basic  difference  between

RENOUNCING  SAMSARA 15
the mother  tantra  and  father  tantra  is that  the mother  tantra  emphasizes  the 
completion  stage,  which  relies  more  on the emptiness  aspect  of the nature  
of mind,  whereas  the father  tantra  emphasizes  the creation  stage,  which  
relies  more  on the luminous  clarity  aspect  of the nature  of  mind. 18 Based  on 
Matangi  s instructions,  Tilopa  fully  achieved  the creation  stage  to the point  
where  it was almost  like he was seeing  the meditational  deity  (Tib.yidam)  
face to face.  Tilopa  had attained  the wisdom  arising  from  the creation  stage  
and  was now  on the verge  of completely  achieving  the completion  stage.
But  Tilopa  decided  that  he needed  further  instructions  and  left southern  
India  to go to northeastern  India  where  he sought  out the teacher  Nagpopa.  
Tilopa  received  the instructions  and empowerments  of the Chakrasamvara  
practice  from  Nagpopa,  although  he had already  received  these  from  Karpo  
Sangmo.  However,  there are three lineages  of Chakrasamvara,  with one 
coming  from  Luipa,  the second  from  Nagpopa,  and the third  from  Dribupa.  
This  lineage  of Chakrasamvara  came  from  Nagpopa,  who became  Tilopa ’s 
third  teacher.
Tilopa  received  all the pith instructions  of Nagpopa  and became  a 
fully  accomplished  practitioner  in the completion  stage.  Even though  he 
had completely  accomplished  the creation  and completion  stages  of prac­
tice, he still hadn ’t attained the ultimate  view.  So he left that part of India  
and went to the west of India  where  he encountered  the great mahasid-  
dha Lavapa.  From  Lavapa  he received  the pith instructions  of Mahamudra  
instructions,  especially  the “three  heart  spheres. ”19 In summary,  Tilopa  had 
traveled  to the four  directions  of India  and had become  the disciple  of four 
great  mahasiddhas:  Matangi,  Lavapa,  Karpo  Sangmo,  and Nagpopa,  from  
whom  he received  the mother  tantra,  the father  tantra,  and the Mahamudra  
instructions.  He had not only  received  these  instructions  but he also prac­
ticed  them  until  he had fully  mastered  them.
Tilopa  received  one further  instruction  from Matangi,  who told him,  
“Now  you must  meditate  continuously  on the very  essence  of suchness,  the 
nature  of phenomena  and mind.  To do this, you must find some  kind  of 
activity  to engage  in. Previously,  you were a king, so you still have some  
vestiges  of class arrogance  and this must  be destroyed. ” Matangi  ordered  
Tilopa  to take the job of extracting  oil from  sesame  seeds  by beating  them,  
which  was an occupation  performed  only  by the lowest  caste.  Furthermore,  
Matangi  told Tilopa  that in the state of Bengal  in eastern  India there  was 
a kingdom  ruled  by a very divine  king,  who was no ordinary  king  but an 
incarnate  king  called  Raja Udmakemara.  He had blessed  the land so that

16 THE LIFE OF TILOPA
whoever  practiced  meditation  there  would  travel  very  rapidly  on the path  to 
enlightenment  and  attain  exceedingly  good  results.  Matangi  also  explained  
that in this kingdom  there  was a town  called  Harikila  that had a market ­
place  and a brothel.  Tilopa  must  become  a pimp  and a servant  to a prosti ­
tute in this brothel.  Matangi  explained  to Tilopa  that at this point  in his 
life he should  begin  engaging  in the second  type of mahasiddha  behavior  
of “vanquishing  behavior. ” This outer  activity,  supported  by the power  of 
samadhi,  is not a meditation  practice  but rather  it is a practice  in which  
one puts oneself  in lowly  jobs  to destroy  any  vestiges  of arrogance.  Matangi  
also predicted  that if he practiced  in this  way, Tilopa  would  attain  perfect  
powers  (Skt.  siddhis)  and benefit  many  beings. 20
So Tilopa  went to Bengal  in eastern  India  and did exactly  as his guru  
Matangi  told him. During  the day he pounded  sesame  seeds  to extract  oil 
to be sold,  and at night  he was a servant  to the prostitute  Dharima.  All the 
time  that  he was  engaged  in this outward  behavior,  his mind  was completely  
absorbed  in the samadhi  of suchness  (that  is, phenomena  as it really  is).
By doing  this practice  for twelve  years,  Tilopa  reached  enlightenment.  
He was then seen by the people  around  him in different  marvelous  ways. 
Some saw him flying  through the  sky like a blazing  ball of fire surrounded  
by fourteen  butter  lamps.  Others  saw him in the midst  of brilliant  light,  
sitting  as a yogi surrounded  by women  and dakinis  who were  circumam ­
bulating  and making  prostrations  to him.  Still others  saw him sitting  as an 
ordained  monk  absorbed in samadhi  in the midst  of brilliant  light.  When  
people  began  to see these  things,  they  began  to tell Dharima  that  something  
had happened  to Tilopa.  Dharima  was really  shocked  at hearing  this, and 
when  she went  out to see for herself,  she saw Tilopa  in the sky before  her, 
radiant  and brilliant.  In his left hand  he held a mortar,  and with  his right  
hand,  Tilopa  was crushing  sesame  seeds  with a pestle.  Dharima  was upset  
and confessed  to Tilopa  that she had no idea  he was such  a holy  person  and 
felt very  sorry  that  she had ordered  him around  as a prostitute  s servant  for 
all these  years.  She then offered  him her deep  confession.
Tilopa  replied,  “You are not at fault.  You didn ’t know  I was a mahasid-  
dha. Actually,  I have attained  all the siddhis  because  of you. I needed  to 
work  as your  servant  to become  enlightened.  There  has been  no harm  done. ” 
Dharima  developed  great  faith  in Tilopa,  who  then  touched  her on the head  
with a flower.  He blessed  her saying,  “May all the experience  and wisdom  
I possess  arise in you at this very instant. ” Because  of her strong  connec ­
tion with him, she immediately  had a profound  experience  of realization

RENOUNCING  SAMSARA 17
and became  a yogini.  Everyone  around  them was completely  amazed  and 
rejoiced.  Word  quickly  spread  to the king  who  came  in regal  splendor  riding  
on an elephant  to see what  was going  on. As he approached,  he noticed  that 
Tilopa  and Dharima  were  floating  in the sky at the height  of  seven  plantain  
trees.
Tilopa then sang  a song of realization  (doha)  to the king  and everyone  
assembled  there.  This  doha  condensed  all the pith instructions  Tilopa  had 
received  of  the mother  tantra,  the father  tantra,  and the Mahamudra  teach ­
ings. In this spiritual  song  he used  several  metaphors.  We will discuss  this  
doha  sung  at the marketplace  in the next  chapter.

4
Teaching  Mahamudra  at Pancapana
To review:  after Tilopa  had practiced  for twelve  years  and was seen float ­
ing in the sky, the news  traveled  to the king  who heard  that the prostitute  
Dharima  had been liberated  by an incarnate  yogin.  The king,  riding  on 
his elephant,  with a large  retinue  went  to see Tilopa.  Both the yogin  and 
Dharima  were sitting  at the crossroads  of the marketplace  in the town  of 
Pancapana  and had risen  into the sky to the height  of  seven  plantain trees.  
Tilopa  then sang  this famous  spiritual  song  of realization  in the resonant  
and harmonious  voice  of Mahabrahma: 21
1. Sesame  oil is the essence.
Although  the ignorant  know  that it is in the sesame  seed,
They  do not understand  the way of  cause,  effect,  and becoming,
And  therefore  are unable  to extract  the essence,  the sesame  oil.
2. Although  innate  coemergent  wisdom  
Abides in the heart  of all beings,
If it is not shown  by the guru,  it cannot  be realized.
Just as sesame  oil that remains  in the seed does  not appear.
3. If one removes  the husk  by pounding  the sesame  seed.
The sesame  oil, the essence,  appears.
In the same  way, the guru  shows  the truth  of reality  (Skt.  tatbata ), 
And  all phenomena  become  indivisible  in one essence.
Kyeho\

ZO — THE LIFE OF TILOPA
4. The far-reaching,  unfathomable  meaning  
Is apparent  at this very  moment.
O how  wondrous! 22
Thus  in ultimate  reality  there  is no path to be practiced,  no difference  
between  what  is to be abandoned  and what  is to be used as an antidote.  
However,  on the conventional  level of reality,  all phenomena  depend  on 
causes  and effects.  This  difference  between  conventional  and ultimate  real­
ity is illustrated  by the example  of sesame  seed and sesame  oil. If one has a 
mortar,  pestle,  and sesame  seeds,  but there  is no one to grind  the seeds,  one 
cannot  obtain  the oil. This  is because  everything  produced  is not created  by 
just  one cause  or one  condition,  but rather  things  are produced  through  the 
collective  force  of causal  conditions.  In the same  way, although  the dhar-  
makaya  pervades  all sentient  beings,  if the guru  does  not point  out this fact 
or if the path  of realization  is not practiced,  the end result  of practice  will 
not be actualized.  The relative  level of phenomena  depends  on a series  of 
cause  and effects;  the realization  of this wisdom  of  suchness  is illustrated  in 
terms  of the pounding  of sesame  seeds  to extract  the oil.
As Tilopa  sang  this spiritual  song  to all the people assembled  there,  just 
by hearing  the sound  of this song,  they  were  liberated  from  the bondage  of 
the disturbing  emotions.  They  saw the wisdom  of things  as they actually  
are and attained  the siddhi  of the celestial  realm.  So, the country  of Sahor  
was emptied  of people  who  were  confused  and unvirtuous  and thus Sahor  
became  famous  for this.
I shall  now  explain  the meaning  of this spiritual  song  in terms  of Maha-  
mudra  in three  parts:  the view  of Mahamudra,  the practice  of the path of 
Mahamudra,  and the benefit  of the result  of  having  practiced  Mahamudra.
The View of Mahamudra  
1. Sesame  oil is the essence.
Although  the ignorant  know  the oil is in the sesame  seed.
They  do not understand  the way of cause,  effect,  and becoming,
And  therefore  are unable to extract  the essence,  the sesame  oil.
The first verse of Tilopa  s spiritual  song  presents  the principal  metaphor  
concerning  buddha  nature.  This buddha  nature  or buddha  essence  is pre­

TEACHING  MAHAMUDRA  AT PANCAPANA 21
sented  in the same  way that “the ground ” (as in ground,  path,  and fruition)  
is presented  in the Mahayana  sutras  and the Vajrayana  teachings.
In the second  turning  of the wheel  of Dharma,  there  is a presentation  
of emptiness  in terms  of the Middle  Way  (Skt.  Madhyamaka ) school,  par­
ticularly  in the Consequence  (Skt. Prasangika ) school,  that demonstrates  
that the ground  or foundation  of  phenomena  is emptiness.  Emptiness  (Skt.  
shunyata ) is important  in understanding  the Perfection  of Wisdom  or Pra- 
jnaparamita  teachings.
However,  in the third  turning  of the wheel  of Dharma,  buddha nature  
is taught  as being  present  within  each and every  sentient  being.  The belief  
that buddha  nature is present  in all beings  is also the same  understanding  
of  buddha  nature  that  is found  in Mahamudra  meditation.  The  main  differ ­
ence  between  the presentation  of  buddha  nature  in the Middle  Way  school  
and in Mahamudra  teachings  is that,  in the Middle  Way  school,  the under ­
standing  of emptiness  is arrived  at through  inferential  reasoning,  whereas  
in the tantric  or Vajrayana  path,  emptiness  is arrived  at by directly  experi ­
encing  it when  examining  the mind.  The Middle  Way school  teaches  that 
all things  or phenomena  are empty.  For example,  the Middle  Way  school  
begins  by saying  that to understand  the reason that  phenomena  are empty,  
we must  first  demonstrate  that  the subtlest  indivisible  particles  (atoms)  have  
no inherent  existence.  Then  it reasons  that coarse  substances  that are made  
up of these  atoms  must  also have  no inherent  existence.  Furthermore,  this 
means  that composites  such as trees and people,  which  are composed  of 
these  coarse  substances, can then  logically  be shown  not to have any inher ­
ent existence  either  and  so forth.  In other  words,  they  prove,  using  logic,  that 
phenomena  are empty.  However,  as already  mentioned,  in the third  turning  
of  the wheel  of  Dharma  and in Mahamudra  practice  when  we look  nakedly  
at mind,  we find nothing  substantial  and this leads  to the understanding  
that  phenomena  are empty. 23
Whether  we are using  the Rangtong  Middle  Way  presentation  or the 
Shentong  Middle  Way  presentation  of  emptiness, 24 they  both  agree  that  the 
presence  of buddha  nature  is in the continuum  of the mind  of every  being  
and that both  of these  presentations  are effective  in leading  to a realization  
of ultimate  truth  (Tib.  dondam).  However,  because  the Mahayana  Middle  
Way  approach  relies  on inference  rather  than direct  experience,  it is very 
difficult  to develop  a conclusive  experience  and realization  of  this  emptiness  
using  logical  reasoning.  The reason  this is such a  difficult  and long  process

22 THE LIFE OF TILOPA
is that inference  uses conceptual  understanding,  which  relies on a belief  
in something,  and this type of understanding  takes  a great  deal of time to 
develop.  For that reason,  in the sutras  and their  commentaries  it says that 
the Middle  Way  path  of inference  takes  three  eons,  during  which  one has 
to gather  vast accumulations  of merit  and wisdom  before  such  realization  
can occur.
According  to the tradition  of the Vajrayana,  and especially  Mahamudra,  
it is unnecessary  to engage  in this process  of gathering  the two accumula ­
tions for three  innumerable  eons. In Mahamudra practice,  buddhahood  
can be attained  in one body  and in one lifetime.  The reason for this is that 
Mahamudra  uses the mind  of the practitioner  as an object  of  direct  experi ­
ence.  The  recognition  that  ensues  from  this is the foundation  for the accom ­
plishment  of supreme  attainment.  There  have been many  siddhas  in the 
Kagyu  tradition  who  have  attained  full awakening  in one lifetime  through  
this use of direct  experience. For example, in the Biography  ofMilarepa  we 
find  that  his student  Rechungpa  and  other  students  assembled  in Milarepa  s 
presence  and  said  to him:  “Whether  one looks  at your  fortitude  in undergo ­
ing the austerities  presented  to you  by your  guru  Marpa,  or your  fortitude  in 
practice,  or the manner  in which  you have  attained  buddhahood,  whatever  
aspects  of your  life one looks  at, it is evident  that you are not an ordinary  
person,  that  you must  be the emanation  of  either  a buddha  or a bodhisattva.  
Would  you therefore  please  tell us which  buddha  or bodhisattva  you are an 
emanation  of?”
In response  to this Milarepa  said, “Well,  I know  you all think  that I am 
an emanation  of some  buddha  or bodhisattva,  and that  is evidence  of your  
pure  view, your  sacred  outlook  on me as your  guru.  However,  it is also evi­
dence  of your  severe  misunderstanding  of  Dharma. ” Milarepa  then  went  on 
to explain,  “Thinking  that  the reason  your  guru  is great  and  must  therefore  
be an emanation  of a buddha  or bodhisattva comes  from  your  having  no 
confidence  in the actual  effectiveness  of the Dharma  as a means  of  awaken ­
ing. This  is a misunderstanding  of the Dharma.  I am not an emanation  of  a 
buddha  or bodhisattva;  in fact,  in my life I was a black  magician  who  killed  
many  people  by causing  hailstorms.  Yet later  I met  my guru  Marpa,  received  
extraordinary  instructions  from  him, and by practicing  these  without  any 
laziness  I was able to become  enlightened.  The  fact that  I was an evildoer  in 
my  youth  and  now  I am an awakened  person  comes  from  the  power  and  effec ­
tiveness  of Dharma.  It is very  important  for  you  to understand  this. ” For that 
reason, in Mahamudra,  direct  experience  is taken  as the path  for practice.

TEACHING  MAHAMUDRA  AT PANCAPANA 23
Although  this doha  by Tilopa  is primarily  an instruction  in Mahamudra,  
it can also be explained  at the sutra  level, as in the first few lines of this 
first verse.  The example  of sesame  oil being  within  the sesame  seed is an 
analogy  for the sutra  view  that the nature  within  sentient  beings  is the fact 
that  phenomena  are empty  or without  true existence.  This  means  that  even  
the suffering  of samsara  is empty;  even the disturbing  emotions  of hatred,  
attachment,  ignorance,  jealousy,  and  pride  are empty;  and  even  virtuous  and 
unvirtuous  actions  are empty.  Yet if this is not properly  understood,  there  
is no benefit  in believing this experience  of phenomena  to be empty.  The 
essential  emptiness  of  phenomena  does  not prevent  beings  from  suffering  if 
this emptiness  is not recognized. That  interpretation  of the metaphor  is in 
accordance  with  the second  turning  of the wheel  of Dharma  that empha ­
sizes the Prajnaparamita  teachings  on the recognition  of emptiness.
If we go back and explain  the same lines from the point  of view of 
the third  turning  of the wheel  of Dharma  that emphasizes  the aspect  of 
luminous  clarity  and all-present  wisdom,  there  is a further  implication  to 
this metaphor.  In the third  turning  of the wheel  of Dharma,  the Buddha  
explained  that the ground  or basic  nature  of  mind  is not  just empty;  within  
this basic  nature  are all the qualities  of enlightenment,  and these  qualities  
exist within  the continuum  of all living  beings.  In the Vajrayana  context,  
the sesame  oil refers  to the fact that  while  all beings  have  buddha  nature,  as 
long  as this buddha  nature  is not recognized,  the person  will  not  know  how  
to make  these  qualities  manifest  and benefit  others.
Tilopa  began  this spiritual  song  with  the statement  that  everyone  knows  
that there  is sesame  oil within  the sesame  seed,  but they don ’t know  how  
to extract  it. If they  do not know  that it can be extracted  by being  beaten,  
pressed,  or cooked,  then  they  cannot  obtain  the pure  sesame  oil. This  is very 
similar  to spiritual  realization,  with  the sesame  oil representing  the inborn,  
innate  wisdom  of  mind.  This  explanation  of  the nature  of mind  is somewhat  
beyond  the view explained  in the Rangtong  Middle  Way and the Mind-  
Only  (Skt. Chittamatra ) schools.  The Rangtong  view  basically  points  out 
that the nature  of mind  is actually  only  emptiness.  The Shentong  Madhya-  
maka  school  holds  the belief  that in Mahamudra  there  is an actual  essence  
or nature  of  mind  that is innate,  primordial  wisdom  and that is recognized  
and  actualized  in practice.  In the Foundation  schools,  the realization  is the 
same as in the Middle  Way schools,  but it is achieved  through  gradually  
developing  meditation  through  progressive  stages  and deepening  the view.  
In the Mahamudra  view, by hearing  the explanation  and receiving  the

14 THE LIFE OF TILOPA
introduction  to the minds  nature  as being  unborn, 25 innate  spontaneous  
wisdom  or realization  is attained.  With  this realization,  all our  neurotic  pre­
conceptions  then collapse  into awareness  itself  and we attain  Mahamudra  
directly.  This is the meaning  of the oil in the sesame  seed.
Continuing  with this metaphor,  there is buddha  nature  or buddha  
essence  (Skt.  tathagatagarbha ) in the sutra  tradition  and the “essence  of  pri­
mordial  wisdom ” in the Mahamudra  tradition.  Buddha  essence  is found  in 
the minds  of all sentient  beings.  Just as we cannot  extract  sesame  oil unless  
we know  the process,  we can ’t realize  the unborn  natural  wisdom  of  Maha ­
mudra  without  instructions  from  a qualified  guru.  This  can take  place in a 
myriad  of ways.  Some  gurus  may  point  out the mind  s true nature  merely  by 
explaining  what  it is and saying,  “Your  mind  is Mahamudra. ” Others may 
explain  it through  symbols  or hand  gestures.  Still  others  may  explain  it in a 
completely  special  way such  as when  Tilopa  hit Naropa  in the face  with  his 
sandal  or when  Naropa  introduced  the nature  of  mind  to Marpa  by creating  
a mandala  of a yidam  in the sky. Even  though  there  are numerous  ways  of 
introducing  the nature  of mind,  it is impossible  to actualize  this wisdom  
without  the proper  conditions  in the student  s mind.
The Practice  of the Path
z. Although  innate  coemergent  wisdom  
Abides  in the heart  of  all beings,
If it is not shown  by the guru,  it cannot  be realized,
Just  as sesame  oil that remains  in the seed  does not appear.
The second  verse  uses  a sesame  seed  and its oil as a metaphor  to show  that it 
is necessary to have  a spiritual  friend  to realize this nature.  From  the sutra  
view,  the second  verse  explains  that the nature  of phenomena  is empty  of 
inherent  existence  and this is difficult  to realize  because  the understanding  
of this emptiness  goes  against  our conventional  daily  experience  that  every ­
thing  is solid  and real.  Also the sutra  presentation  of buddha  nature  makes  
it seem  that emptiness  is very difficult  to experience  directly  because  it is 
so veiled  or hidden  by disturbing  emotions  and other  obscurations.  These  
apparent  difficulties are the problem  with  using  inference  as the path.
In Mahamudra,  however,  emptiness  and buddha  nature  are not difficult  
to experience  or far away;  rather  they  are referred  to as “innate  coemergent  
wisdom. ” The term coemergent  (Tib.  Ihenchik  kyepd)  literally  means  “born

TEACHING  MAHAMUDRA  AT PANCAPANA 2-5
together, ” and it shows  that  this  wisdom,  which  is the ground  to be realized,  
is not something  that has to be acquired  because  it has always  been  present  
within  us. The term  innate  (Tib.  nyiik  ma) means  “natural, ” which  means  
that this state has to be acquired  by removing  the quality  of our ordinary  
experience.  In fact, this ground  is far more  natural,  far more  central,  to our 
being  than  the obscurations  that  veil it. This  also means  that  the desire  that 
we must acquire  or create  this wisdom  is a mistake.  In fact, the realiza ­
tion of this ground  does  not depend  upon  any  attempt  to end our ordinary  
experience  and replace  it with something  else. That is why siddhas  of this 
tradition  have  referred  to the  presence  of  this ground  as being  “coemergent, ” 
“natural, ” or “innate. ”
The wisdom  of Mahamudra,  this coemergent  wisdom,  abides  innately  
within  each and every  being,  and since it has not been recognized,  it has 
not yet manifested.  The reason  it has not manifested  is that its recognition  
depends  upon  relying  upon  an authentic  guru  who  can show  us the presence  
of this coemergent  wisdom  within  us. In other  words,  the recognition  of 
coemergent wisdom  does not automatically  happen  at a certain  time in a 
person  s life and it does  not happen  for no particular  reason.
3. If one removes  the husk  by pounding  the sesame  seed.
The sesame  oil, the essence,  appears.
In the same  way, the guru  shows  the truth  of reality  (Skt.  tathata ), 
And  all phenomena  become  indivisible  in one essence.
In this  third  verse,  pounding  the sesame  seeds  to produce  the oil is a meta ­
phor  for going  through  the process  with  a teacher  of  beginning  to recognize  
this nature  that  has always  been  present  within  us. We  have  always  possessed  
coemergent  wisdom since  beginningless  time,  but since  we have  not met a 
teacher  and  received  instruction,  we have  not recognized  it. Again,  what  we 
have not recognized  is referred  to in the sutras  as “buddha  nature ” and in 
the Vajrayana  as “coemergent  wisdom. ”
The last two lines  describe  how  this nature  has always  been  present  and 
can therefore  be recognized.  Pounding  the sesame  seeds  to reveal  the oil 
that has been  hidden  within  the seeds  is similar  to the guru revealing  the 
nature of the mind,  and when  we recognize  it, we can derive  benefit  from  
this recognition.  So the benefit  of the sesame  oil is compared  to the effect  
of  our direct  experience  of mind.
The Sanskrit  word  tathata  (Tib.  de shin  nyi) means  “suchness ” and refers

Z6 — THE LIFE OF TILOPA
to things  as they really  are. The use of this term here points  out that the 
nature  of mind  is already  there;  it is not newly  created,  and it is not some ­
thing  that is being  added  to. Finally,  in the last line, the term  phenomena  
refers  to two aspects of experience— the experience of external  objects  and 
the experience  in which  they  became  internal  subjective  cognition.  The  last 
line, “All phenomena  become  indivisible  in one essence, ” means  that  when  
we gain the direct  experience  of the indivisibility  of external  objects  and 
internal  cognition  we have  achieved  our goal.
In the sutras,  the discussion  of the nature  of phenomena  is usually  
explained  with the  statement  that all things  that appear  are actually  with ­
out true  existence.  In Mahamudra,  however,  we are not concerned  with  the 
nature  of external  objects  but with the direct  experience of the mind  that 
is experiencing  these external  objects.  So the foundation  for our attention  
is the mind —our consciousness  and our thoughts.  Thoughts  manifest  in 
many  forms.  We  have  good  thoughts  (of faith,  compassion,  and  so forth)  and 
bad thoughts  (of  attachment,  hatred,  and so forth).  But if we look  directly  
at these  thoughts, we will see that we can perceive  or “see” them  directly  
because  thoughts  are not distant or hard to find. For example,  we can try 
to determine  where our thoughts  are actually  located.  Are they  inside  our 
body?  If  so, where  in the body?  Can  we find  where  they  are from  by examin ­
ing their  origin  from  the top of  our head  down  to our toes?  Or are thoughts  
outside  of  our  body?  If  so, where  outside  the body  are they  located?  Through  
this kind  of examination  we begin  to discover  that thoughts  are nowhere.  
And  this  experience  is a direct  experience  of emptiness  that  does  not depend  
upon  logical  analysis  or inferential  reasoning.  If  we directly  experience  the 
fundamental  nature  of the emptiness  of thought,  then  we realize  that this 
experience  of the emptiness  of mind  has the same nature  as all external  
phenomena. 26 So this true  experience  of  the emptiness  of  our  own  thoughts  
can result  in understanding  that emptiness  is the nature  of all things.  In 
the sutra  approach,  this is what  is referred to in the Heart  Sutra,  where  it is 
said, “No eyes, no ears, no tongue,  and so forth. ” But in this Mahamudra  
approach,  we are not dealing  with it on the level of reasoning  but on the 
level  of direct  experience.
So, it is possible  to look  directly  at the nature  of  our  own  mind,  and  when  
we do so, we experience  that  the nature  of  this mind  is not anything —it has 
no substantiality,  it has no true  existence,  and therefore  we call it “empty. ” 
And  yet it is not nothingness  in the sense  of voidness,  like in empty  space,  
nor is it a “dead ” emptiness,  like the absence  of thinking  of a corpse.  Rather

TEACHING  MAHAMUDRA  AT PANCAPANA  — 27
this empty  mind  has the ability  to think  and to experience  at the same  time.  
This emptiness  of mind  is referred to as “the unity  of luminous  clarity  and 
emptiness ” or “the unity  of  space  and  wisdom. ” Even  if  we have  never  recog ­
nized  the nature  of  mind,  it has always  been  with  us, and recognition  of  this 
emptiness  does  not affect  the actual  nature  of mind  in any  way.
The Benefit  of the Result
While  this nature  of mind  is totally  unaffected  by the presence  or absence  
of  the recognition  of the mind  s nature,  nevertheless  the recognition  of  this 
nature  is of very  great  benefit  to ourselves.  As discussed  earlier,  if we have  
the direct  experience  of  the emptiness  of phenomena,  then  ordinary  circum ­
stances  that would  normally  cause  us to suffer greatly  will now no longer  
cause  us harm.  Also  the presence  of  conditions  for suffering— even  the pass­
ing of disturbing emotions  through  our mind —all become  self-liberated  
because  the mind  has no substantiality;  therefore  there is nothing  to be 
harmed  by these  negative  circumstances.  This  means  that  the supreme  peace  
of this realization  of the nature  of mind  is the freedom  from  the danger  of 
being  harmed  by apparent  causes  of suffering;  this peace  is called  “great  
joy” or “great  bliss. ” This  joy produces  tremendous  confidence  and delight,  
which  is expressed  in this spiritual  song  by Tilopa  with  the words  Kye ho\ a 
traditional  expression  of delight.
We could  say this doha  (or “song  of instruction ”) is of  greater  value  than  
conventional  Dharma  instructions.  Conventional  instructions  cause  sad­
ness and renunciation  by reminding  us of the suffering  of samsara  in order  
to make  us practice  Dharma.  This spiritual  song is even more  powerful,  
causing  us to become  diligent  because  it produces  a delight  and a confidence  
in the central  meaning  of  Dharma.  In fact,  even  if  we do not fully  recognize  
the true nature  that is presented  in this spiritual  song,  just partially  under ­
standing  it will  give us a method  to free ourselves  and this is a cause  for great  
delight.  To explain  this, the song  gives  the fourth  verse:
4. The far-reaching, unfathomable  meaning
Is apparent  at this very  moment.
O how  wondrous!
In this verse,  “far-reaching ” means  that what is being  presented  in the 
doha  can carry  us all the way along  the path.  It is this realization  that is the

28 THE LIFE OF TILOPA
nature  of the path, and therefore  it traverses  the path that, in the sutras,  
is said to take three  periods  of innumerable  eons to amass  the accumula ­
tion of merit.  The “unfathomable  meaning ” presented  here—the ultimate  
nature  of all phenomena —is unfathomable  by using  inference.  And yet 
here  in this short  spiritual  song  it is presented  in an effective,  brief,  concise,  
and clear  manner.  Having  understood  this,  we need  not place  our hope  for 
enlightenment  in our future  lives,  but we can accomplish  full awakening,  
full buddhahood,  in this  very  lifetime.  Because  such  a profound  point  has 
been so clearly  and  easily  demonstrated,  it is “wondrous. ” What could  be 
more  wonderful  than to have  these  means at our disposal?
Questions
Question:  I have a lot of difficulty  with understanding  how  to look  at the 
nature  of mind.  Is the instruction to look  at external  appearances  without  
altering  them the same technique  that one uses when  one looks  at ones  
mind,  and if  not,  what  are the actual  mechanics  of  how  to look  at the nature  
of your  mind?
Rinpoche: These  two techniques  are slightly  different.  There  is a difference  
between  looking  directly  at appearances  and looking  directly  at the nature  
of the mind.  Because  we have from  beginningless  time developed  a habit  
of samsara,  we experience  external  appearances  as substantial  and  we will 
continue  to experience  them  as though  they  had substantial  existence  until  
we develop  some  extraordinary  level  of  realization.  It is very  difficult  to work  
with external  appearances  in meditation  in the beginning  because  these  
appearances  seem so solid, and therefore  it is recommended  to just leave  
appearances  alone,  since they are not the problem.  They  do not pose any 
particular  harm  or help to us. Our  mind,  on the other  hand,  is manifestly  
insubstantial,  and we can experience  this by looking  for solidity  within  it. 
If  we find  it difficult  to look  directly  at the mind  and  perceive  its insubstan ­
tiality,  then we can select various  substantial  characteristics  and look for 
them  in turn.  For example,  we can look  for a color,  look  for a location,  look  
for a shape, look  for a size, and so on. And  if we take it step by step in this 
manner,  sooner or later  we will definitely  begin  to directly  experience  the 
mind  s insubstantial  nature.

5
Receiving  Secret  Instructions
We begin  Vajrayana  practice  with the beginning  level of “totally  virtuous  
behavior ” and gradually  work  toward  the final  level  of the practice of “vic­
tory in all directions. ” As beginners,  we must  begin  practicing  completely  
virtuous  behavior  until  true  wisdom  and realization  arise  and  this becomes  
a stable  experience  for us. We cannot  begin  our practice  at the level  of  van­
quishing  behavior  by doing  such things  as wearing  bone ornaments  and 
behaving  like a madman.  These  things  are meditative  practices for later  on 
when  we have  gone  through  the various  other  spiritual  stages.
The biography  of  Tilopa  has two aspects:  a “shared ” biography,  in which  
it is assumed  that Tilopa  was a normal  person  who relied  on four  human  
teachers  for training,  and an “unshared ” biography, in which  it is assumed  
that  Tilopa  was a direct  emanation  of  Vajradhara.  The first  part  of  his spiri ­
tual  biography  has already  been  discussed —Tilopa  s meeting  with  these  four 
great  lamas.  The second  part  of  his biography  concerns  his direct  experience  
of Vajradhara;  that is, meeting  the wisdom  dakinis  and receiving  instruc ­
tions  and teachings  directly  from  them  through  visions.  These  two sides  of 
the biography  in no way  conflict  with  each  other.  Actually,  the whole  story  
of Tilopa  is quite  inconceivable.  It would  be foolish  to attempt  to put all 
of these  events  in some  kind  of order  and say, “At this specific  time,  Tilopa  
received  this particular  instruction  from  such  and such a  lama  and had the 
vision  of this particular  wisdom  dakini. ” These  things  happened  simulta ­
neously  and in no chronological  order.  It is quite  possible  that Tilopa  was 
receiving  direct  visionary  experience  from  the wisdom  dakinis  while  he was 
searching  for a teacher  on the worldly  level.
This  chapter  begins  with  telling  how  Tilopa  obtained  instructions  from  
the secret  treasure  house  of the wisdom  dakinis  in the western  realm  of

30 THE LIFE OF TILOPA
Urgyen.  The “western  land  of Urgyen ” refers  to the land  of total  enjoyment  
of  the dakas  and  dakinis  who  have  reached  the  profound  levels  of  realization  
and mastery  of the nature  of phenomena.  “Urgyen ” here refers  to a level of 
realization.  However,  it also seems  that there  were  many  mahasiddhas  who  
came from  a particular  area in the western  part  of India  (usually  said to be 
the Swat  Valley  in Pakistan),  and this  place  was called  Urgyen.  For  example,  
in the seven-line  prayer  to Padmasambhava,  it says, “You  who  have  gone to 
the northwest  border  of Urgyen. ” There  is also a very  symbolic  meaning  to 
these  cardinal  directions,  so it is hard to locate  this place  literally.  At the 
same time,  these  symbolic  meanings  are involved  with  actual  directions  as 
we think  of them.
While  Tilopa  was still a youth,  one day he was sitting  in a wooded  area 
under  a tree taking  care of a herd of cattle  and studying  the alphabet  by 
himself  in accordance  with the  Indian  tradition  of those  times.  A wisdom  
dakini  appeared  to him in the form  of a very  ugly  old woman  who  was dis­
gusting  to look  at. She then asked  him,  “Who  is your  father?  What  is your  
country?  What book  are you reading?  What are these  cattle? ” and so on. 
Tilopa  answered,  “My country  is the land of Sahor.  My father  is the Brah ­
min Salwa,  my mother  is the Brahmini  Saldanma,  and  my sister  is Zaldren. ” 
He also answered  the other  questions,  saying  that the cattle  that he was 
taking  care  of  were  the source  of  his family ’s wealth  and that  he was reading  
a book  to learn  the Dharma.
This  hag  became  extremely  angry  with  him  and  said,  “You  know  nothing.  
This  isn’t true!  Your  land  and country  is the western  realm  of Urgyen.  Your  
father  is Chakrasamvara,  your mother  is Vajrayogini,  and I am your  sister  
and my name  is Sukhada. ” Then  she said,  “The  place  where  you are sitting  is 
amid  bodhi  trees,  and the herds  you need  to take care of are the degrees  of 
your samadhi.  The Dharma  you are studying  is the inexpressible  Dharma  
of the whispered  lineage. 27 The Dharma  you are reading  is in the hands  of 
the wisdom  dakinis. ”
He asked  the wisdom  dakini,  “Will  I be able to obtain  teachings  of this 
whispered  lineage? ” She answered,  “You  have  the three  prophesied  qualities  
of having  perfect  samaya  and being  an emanation  yourself. ”28 She contin ­
ued, “With  these three  qualities,  you are entitled  to go to the western  land  
of Urgyen  and demand  the teachings  directly  from the wisdom  dakinis  
there.  In order  to get there,  you need  three  things:  a crystal  ladder, a bridge  
adorned  with  precious  jewels,  and a magical  key made  of grass. ”
The items  mentioned  in this  story  are, of course,  symbolic.  For instance,

RECEIVING  SECRET  INSTRUCTIONS 31
in the life story  of Padmasambhava  (Tib.  Guru  Rinpoche),  it was predicted  
that many  obstacles  to his receiving the Dharma  would  arise.  Padmasam ­
bhava  wanted  to go to the hidden  realm  called  Beyu  that required  a special  
way to enter  it. It was said that there  was a raging  river that no one could  
cross  with  any ferry,  and  there  was a tree  on this side  of  the river  that  was the 
gate to this secret  kingdom,  but it couldn ’t be cut down  with  any  kind  of ax 
or sword.  However,  at the base of the tree was a crystal  knife,  and the tree 
could  be cut down  with  this  crystal  knife.  When  the tree fell across  the river,  
it would  serve  as a bridge  to the hidden  kingdom  in which  there  were  many  
kinds  of  precious  metals  in this pure  land  of nirmanakaya-sambhogakaya-  
dharmakaya.  The adept  capable  of  going  through  the process  of  cutting  the 
tree could  attain  many  kinds  of  samadhi  and  great  teachings  in this realm.  
Khenpo  Gangshar  has written  a treatise  about  this particular  realm.  He 
said some  people  think  that they  can just go find the river  that nobody  can 
cross,  find the tree,  chop  it down,  and cross  the river.  He explains  that this 
is impossible  for someone  who has accumulated  negative  karma.  He also 
writes  that,  in the literal  sense,  a river  impossible  to cross  does  not exist  and 
a tree that  can ’t be cut down  with  an iron  ax and  yet can be cut down  with  a 
glass  knife  also doesn ’t exist.  He then  shows  that  these  parts  of  the story  are 
symbolic.  The incredible  torrent  that can ’t be crossed  is the turbulence  of 
samsara.  The tree that  can ’t be cut down  by ordinary  means  is the tree  of  ego- 
clinging.  The crystal  knife  nestled  in the tree of ego-clinging  is the knife  of 
wisdom.  This  metaphor  shows  that  the practice  of  Dharma  involves  travers ­
ing samsara  by means  of  walking  over  one ’s ego-clinging.  At the beginning  
of the path, ego fixation  is an integral  part of the practice.  Traversing  over 
this tree of ego-clinging  is the path  itself,  and entering  into the wondrous  
hidden  kingdom  of the nirmanakaya-sambhogakaya-dharmakaya  is the 
richness  of the fruition  that one will attain  after  completing  the path.  As 
we can see, these  symbolic  stories are  very  profound  teachings.
I believe  that  this  story  about  Tilopa  is also  symbolic.  The  crystal  ladder  is 
a metaphor  for the pure  view  of realizing  emptiness,  which  is like a crystal.  
The  jeweled  bridge  is a metaphor  for meditation  because  meditation  on rest­
ing  on the nature  of  the mind  is so uncommon  that  it is like a bridge  covered  
with  jewels  that are considered  very  pure.  The grass  key is a metaphor  for 
taking  action  without  attachment.  The  key that can do this is made  of  grass  
because one doesn ’t become  attached  to something  made  of grass.  The key 
actually  represents  mastering  the subtle  channels  and the energy  flowing  
within  the vajra  body.

31 THE LIFE OF TILOPA
In accordance  with the prophecy  of the wisdom  dakini,  Tilopa  asked  
his parents  for permission  to go to Urgyen.  Tilopa  told them  that he had 
received  a prophecy  that he was to go to the western  realm  of Urgyen  and 
receive  instructions  from the wisdom  dakinis  there,  and his mother  and 
father  assented.  So, he went  to the western  realm  of  Urgyen  and confronted  
many  dakinis  guarding  this land  who tried  to scare  him away  with  projec ­
tions  of many  different  wrathful  and frightful  manifestations.  He was very  
proud  of the fact that  he was able to overcome  any fear they  projected  at 
him and  wasn ’t afraid  of their  manifestations  in the slightest. He went  past 
the nirmanakaya  and the sambhogakaya  dakinis  right  into the very  heart  
of the mandala,  which  was the dharmakaya  court  in the center  of the realm  
of Urgyen.
As Tilopa  entered  the center  of the mandala,  which  was the temple  of 
fragrance  (Skt. gandhalaya ), he sat down  comfortably  without  any inhi­
bition  before  Bhagavati,  the great  mother  of all the dakinis.  All the other  
dakas and dakinis  were  very  upset  that he just strode  into the center  of the 
mandala  without  offering  any respect  to the mother of all buddhas.  They  
voiced  this opinion  to Bhagavati,  and she replied,  “He is, in fact, the father  
of  all buddhas —the emanation  of  Chakrasamvara  himself.  Even  ifyou  were  
to produce a huge  hailstorm  of  vajras,  he would  not be harmed  in any way. 
He has every  right  to sit with  me without  offering  obeisance. ” So the dakas  
and dakinis  settled  back  in their  places  to witness  the next  stage.
The mother  of all buddhas  asked  Tilopa,  “What  do you want?  Why  
did you come  to this western  realm  of Urgyen? ” He answered,  “My sister  
Sukhada,  the wisdom  dakini,  told  me I should  come  here  to receive  the spe­
cial unwritten  pith instructions  that come from  the lineage of direct  hear­
ing. I have  come  here  for these  instructions,  so please  give  them  to me.” Then  
Bhagavati  made  three  symbolic  gestures.  The first symbol  she made  was a 
physical  symbol.  Then  she said a seed syllable  for the speech  symbol,  and 
following  that she made  a hand  gesture  (Skt.  mudra ) for the mind  symbol.
Tilopa  knew  what  these  symbols  meant  and  knew  that  he had to explain  
their  meaning  to go further.  He said,  “I recognize  that this physical  symbol  
(tsakali ) is the treasury  of  the body,  of  physical  experience.  I need  to receive 
ail the instructions  of the lineage  from the dharmakaya  manifestation  of 
Vajradhara  himself  for this. ” When  he heard  the seed syllable,  he recog ­
nized  that this represented  the treasury  of speech.  From  the great  treasury  
of  speech,  he requested  all the teachings,  all the empowerments,  and all the 
different  degrees  ofpractice  of the  path  of ripening.  Seeing  the hand  gesture.

RECEIVING  SECRET  INSTRUCTIONS 33
he recognized  that it was the symbol  of the treasury  of mind.  He therefore  
asked  Bhagavati  for all the teachings  on Mahamudra,  the path  of  liberation.  
He requested  all these  teachings  of the “path  of ripening ” and the “path  of 
liberation ”29 by directly  understanding  the meaning  of the symbols.
Bhagavati  replied, “It is true.  In my treasure  house  is the body  where the 
wish-fulfilling  jewel  of the lineage  lies. But the door  to this treasure  house  is 
locked  with  the lock  of  samaya.  Those  who  don ’t have  the key  of  samaya  can­
not enter.  It is also true  that  in my treasure  house  of  speech  are the teachings  
of  the path  of  ripening.  All the yidam  deities  in this treasure  house  are closed  
to those  who don ’t have a prophecy.  Finally,  it is true that in my treasure  
house  of the mind  there  is the dharmakaya,  which  contains  all the correct  
instructions  of Mahamudra,  the path  of instantaneous  liberation.  But this 
is closed  to those  who  have  not attained  full accomplishment. ”
The “treasure  house ” should  not be thought  of as an actual  place that 
can be  entered  using  a key. What  this passage  means is that if one has per­
fect samaya  by keeping  all one ’s vows,  and one has received  a command  
that  predicts  one ’s enlightenment,  and one has also attained  a deep  level  of 
realization,  then these  treasures  and the richness  of the pith instructions  
will be available  to one and this is like opening  a door  so one can go in and 
take  whatever  instructions  one  wants.  Without  perfect  samaya,  one cannot  
receive  the legacy  of this lineage.  Without  the prophecy,  one cannot  receive 
all the teachings  of the path of ripening.  Without  the direct  experience of 
the nature  of dharmata,  one cannot  understand  Mahamudra.
Tilopa replied  to Bhagavati,  “My sister  the dakini  gave me a key to get 
into these  treasure  houses. ” At this, Bhagavati  and the dakas  and dakinis  
roared  with  laughter.  Bhagavati  responded  laughingly,  “A blind  man can ’t 
see an image.  A deaf  man  can ’t hear  a sound.  A mute  can ’t talk.  And  a cripple  
can ’t stand  up and run.  So whatever  prophecy  you have comes  from  some  
demon  and is a fake. ” Tilopa  was unperturbed  by all this  joking  and replied,  
“I have the first key, the key of perfect  samaya,  because  I have recognized  
the self-arisen  clear  nature  of mind.  I have the second  key of the prophecy  
because  I have recognized  my mind  as Mahamudra,  the dharmata  itself.  
I have the third  key of actual  accomplishment,  having  merged  my mind  
totally  with the Dharmakaya  and have direct,  continuous  experience  of it. 
So, I am fully  authorized  to enter  the treasury. ”
When  Tilopa  said,  “I have the key of prophecy  because  I have realized  
Mahamudra, ” he was referring  to instantaneous  prophecy.  The  word  proph ­
ecy in Tibetan  is lung  ten, which  means  “prediction, ” and there are two

34 — THE life of tilopa
kinds  of prophecies.  The first kind  of  prophecy  is when  a realized  individ ­
ual says, “In the future  time so-and-so  will attain  such-and-such  state of 
realization. ” The second  kind  of  prophecy  is when  an individual,  through  
direct experience,  knows  something  and has attained  something.  That is 
the instantaneous  prophecy  of  having  attained  Mahamudra  that  Tilopa  was 
referring  to.
The Bhagavati  was extremely  impressed  with Tilopa  and said,  “You are 
the father  of all buddhas;  you are  the actual  emanation  of Chakrasamvara.  
You have  perfect  samaya,  the prophecy,  and are fully  accomplished.  There ­
fore, I bestow  upon  you these  jewels  from  each of my three treasuries. ” So 
she revealed  to him these  three  jewels.  Tilopa  understood  them  instantly,  
saying,  “Through  these  three  jewels  from the three  treasure  houses  I will 
attain  enlightenment.  I am fearless  and fly in the sky like a bird,  and there  
is nothing  that can obstruct  me. I am Sherab Sangpo (“good  and deep  wis­
dom ”). From  this time  on, Tilopa  was known  as Tilopa  Sherab  Sangpo.
Bhagavati  and all the dakas  and dakinis  told Tilopa,  “You must  reside  
with  us here  in the land  of  Urgyen. ” Tilopa  answered,  “No, I cannot.  I have  
my disciples —Naropa,  Rerepa, and Kasuriva —and  I must  take these  three  
jewels  from  the treasury  to bestow  them  upon  my many  disciples. ”30 Having  
said this, he left the land of Urgyen  and was constantly followed  by nine  
formless  dakinis  who made  the prophecy  that  he would  achieve  all attain ­
ments  and be able to guide  and help all sentient  beings.
In this  way,  these  teachings  or pith  instructions  that  Tilopa  brought  from  
the land  of Urgyen became  extremely  widespread  in the land  of Tibet.

6
Gaining  Disciples
The main  disciple  of Tilopa  was the great  Naropa.  However,  the whole  story  
of  Tilopa  accepting  Naropa  as his student  and the story  of  all the difficulties  
Naropa  had being  trained  by Tilopa  are not given  in any detail  in Tilopa ’s 
spiritual  biography  because  they  are vividly  described  in Naropas  spiritual  
biography.
Naropa  was a prince  and an extremely  learned  scholar.  Consequently,  he 
was arrogant  and  had  a great  deal  of pride.  For  Naropa  to progress  along  the 
path,  Tilopa  had to destroy  his arrogance.  Naropa  had already  mastered  a 
great  deal  of  knowledge,  so in training  Naropa,  Tilopa  did not give Naropa  
empowerments  or specific  teachings.  Rather,  Tilopa  provided  an environ ­
ment  for Naropa  to destroy  his pride  and arrogance  by giving  him all kinds  
of hardships  to undergo.  The transmission  of Mahamudra  teachings  to 
Naropa  took  place through  symbols, 31 and the empowerment  that  did take 
employed  Tilopas  skill  at using  symbols to subdue  Naropa  s pride.  Finally,  
Naropa  gained  realization  when  Tilopa  slapped  him across  his face with a 
shoe.  Naropas wisdom  and realization  somehow  naturally  manifested  by 
means  of  Tilopa  s way  of  dealing  with  him.
The  depiction  of  Tilopa  holding  a fish is based  upon  the story  of  Naropas  
first meeting  with  him.  When  Naropa  went  to look  for Tilopa,  he had no 
idea  exactly  where  Tilopa  was.  Naropa  was  just  going  on a prediction  that  he 
had received  that  the one who  would  be his guru  was somewhere  in eastern  
India  and that his name  was Tilop  or Tilopa.  He had no idea  what  Tilopa  
looked  like or exactly  where  he was, and this caused  him great  hardship  in 
finding Tilopa.  Having  gone through  a lot of difficulty  already  and still 
not having  found  him, one day he tracked  Tilopa  down  to a certain local ­
ity, and when  he arrived  there,  he asked  the local  people  if the mahasiddha

36 — THE LIFE OF TILOPA
Tilopa  lived there.  The person  he spoke  to said they had never  heard  of 
any mahasiddha  Tilopa,  but that there was a beggar  named  Tilopa  who  
was right  over  there,  indicating  a place  nearby.  Naropa  was inspired  by this 
because  he thought  Tilopa  was a mahasiddha,  and therefore  he could  be 
living  as a beggar.  When  he went  over to meet  him for the first time,  he saw 
Tilopa  sitting  there  with  a pile of fish that he had caught,  snapping  his fin­
gers and thereby  causing the consciousness of each fish to be liberated  into 
the dharmadhatu,  after  which  he would  eat the fish. Since  this was the first 
ofTilopa ’s more  famous  recorded  miraculous  displays  and  was the first  time  
that Naropa  actually came  into his physical  presence,  it is commemorated  
by the traditional  depiction  in drawings  and paintings  of Tilopa  holding  
a fish.
Tilopa.  Drawing  by Jamyong  Singhe, 
courtesy  of  Namo  Buddha  Publications.

GAINING  DISCIPLES 37
The Tilopa  Cave.  Tilopa  medicated  and gave  teachings  to Naropa  in this cave at 
Pashupatinath,  one of the most  sacred  places  in Nepal,  about  ten miles  outside  
of Kathmandu.  The cave has since  been faced  with a door  and portico  and has a 
statue  of Tilopa  inside.  Photo  courtesy  of Clark  Johnson.
Unlike  Naropa,  the eight  disciples  mentioned  in this particular  spiritual  
biography  did not have  a natural  inclination  toward  practicing  Dharma  and 
had to be subdued  through  miracles  and magical displays.  The first  of these  
eight  main  disciples  of  Tilopa  became  a disciple  because a certain  king  was 
always  concerned  about  his mother ’s happiness.  He asked  his mother,  “How  
can I make  you happy? ” His mother  replied,  “You must  gather  all the pandi-  
tas and mahasiddhas  and yogins  together  and sponsor  a great  feast-offering  
ceremony. ” So the king  made  the arrangements,  but in a feast-offering  cere­
mony  someone  has to act as the master  of  ceremonies.  They  decided  that  the 
master  of ceremonies  should  be the yogin Marti,  who  was a renowned  and 
accomplished  yogin.  He naturally  accepted  the position  of master  of cere­
monies.  But  Tilopa ’s ugly  sister  appeared  and told the assembly,  “You ’ve got 
the wrong  person  in charge  of  this feast  offering. ” They  replied,  “Who  then  
do you think  should  be the leader? ” She answered,  “My brother,  Tilopa, ” 
and then she vanished.

38 — THE LIFE OF TILOPA
A few minutes  later  she returned  with  Tilopa  and this started  a contest  
between  Tilopa  and  Marti  to see who  was,  in fact,  the best  master  of  ceremo ­
nies. In the beginning  of the contest,  Tilopa  equaled all  of the miraculous  
displays  that Marti  performed.  Finally,  at the end of this contest,  Tilopa  
made  the sun and moon  fall to the ground  and turned  his body  completely  
inside  out, revealing  whole  universes  in each of his pores.  At that point,  
Marti  realized  that he was no match  for this great  yogin.  He developed  
great  faith  in Tilopa  and requested  transmission  from  him.  Tilopa  agreed  
and  gave  him  all the  pith  instructions  and  empowerments  that  he requested.  
Thus the mahasiddha  Marti  became  the first of Tilopa  s eight  renowned  
disciples.  He became known  as Nuden  Lodro.
During  this time,  the Buddhists  were  having  a great  deal of trouble  in 
southern  India  because  there  was an extremely  clever  and erudite  Hindu  
who was defeating  them in debate.  According  to the tradition  of those  
times,  whoever  lost a debate  had to reject  his own teachings  and convert  to 
the religion  of the winner.  Therefore,  the Buddhists  were  suffering  terribly.  
Tilopa  received  news  of  this and  headed  there  disguised  as a monk.  When  he 
arrived  where  the Hindu  was causing  all the trouble,  he was extremely  rude  
to the Hindu,  irritating  him.  The Hindu  said,  “I challenge  you to debate.  If 
I lose, then I will reject my teachings  and convert  to yours.  If you lose, the 
same applies to you. ” He was fairly  confident  that he would  win. However,  
Tilopa  won  the debate.  The  Hindu  then  displayed  his miraculous  power,  by 
trying  to make  the sun set by pushing  it down  toward  the western  horizon.  
Tilopa  quite  easily  changed  the direction  of  the sun and  kept  it from  setting.  
When  the sun returned  to its normal  position,  Tilopa  made  the sun set, and 
no matter  how  much  the Hindu  tried  to make  the sun come  back  up again,  
he had no effect  on it. So he lost and admitted  that he had. At this point,  
Tilopa  pulled  out a knife and told the Hindu,  “Now  I am going  to give 
you a haircut  because  you have to enter  the Buddhist  way, which  requires  
the cutting  of your  hair. ”32 The Hindu  was really  upset  about  this and ran 
away  while Tilopa  chased  after  him. The Hindu  then turned  around,  and 
blazing  fire from  his mouth,  burned  Tilopa.  Tilopa  returned  the fire with  
more  of  his own  fire,  which  was much  more  powerful  than  the Hindu  s fire. 
Tilopa  s fire mixed  with  the Hindu  s fire and  turned  toward  the Hindu,  who  
was severely burned.  At this  point,  he gave up and the Hindu  Nagpogowa  
became  the second  of Tilopas  great  disciples.
The third  disciple  was found  during  the time  that  the kingdoms  in Ben­
gal, which  were  very  rich,  were  under  attack  from an extremely  vicious  and

GAINING  DISCIPLES 39
deceitful  magician.  This  magician  had  been  progressing  through  the various  
kingdoms  in the south  of India,  creating  enormous  armies  with  his magic  
and  causing  these  kingdoms  to surrender  out of  fear  of  war.  After  he robbed  
and pillaged  the palaces  of  one kingdom,  he continued  on to the next  king ­
dom,  each  time  using  his magical  power  to defeat  his enemies.  The  magician  
arrived  one day  with  his horde  of  magically  produced  armies  in a city  of  one 
of the kingdoms  of Bengal,  and all the people  in the city were extremely  
frightened  and convened  a large  meeting  to discuss  what  they  should  do in 
the face of this attack.
Then  along  came  Tilopa  s ugly  old sister  and asked  those  gathered  at the 
meeting,  “What  are you doing? ” They  answered,  “We are deciding  what  to 
do about  this invasion. ” She suggested,  “You cant  win unless  you use the 
services  of my brother. ” They  asked  where  he was, and she answered,  “He 
is waltzing  with  corpses  in the charnel  ground. ” Of  course, the citizens  did 
not  believe  her and  thought  she  was crazy.  But  they  decided  to go take  a look  
anyway,  and  when  they  did, they  saw  Tilopa  was doing  exactly  what  the old 
lady  had said. He was dancing  with  corpses  hanging  from  a tree by a single  
horse  hair. Seeing that spectacle,  they decided  that  he must  have magical  
power  and invited  him to defend  their  city. Tilopa  did this with  the power  
of his samadhi  by completely  dissolving  the magical  illusion  created  by the 
magician.  He then  grabbed  hold  of  him and threw  him  into  jail. This  magi ­
cian then  became the third  of  Tilopas  main  disciples.
The  fourth  disciple  was a woman  who  ran a brewery  in central  India  with  
the help  of a young  servant.  She had become  very  famous  for the quality  of 
her beer and was extremely  proud  and attached  to her business.  One day, 
when the young  male  servant  was away  from  the brewery,  Tilopa  entered  it 
and began  pulling  all the stoppers  out of the kegs of beer,  letting  the beer 
flow onto the ground.  The woman  was furious  and became  very abusive  
toward  Tilopa,  who then disappeared.  The lady then sat down,  weeping  
over her fate of having  lost all of her wonderful  beer. The young  servant  
returned,  and having  heard  what  had happened,  shouted,  “We should  kill 
the person  who did this. ” At this point,  Tilopa  transformed  himself  into a 
cat and  began  jumping  among  the beer  barrels  and  pulling  out the rest of  the 
stoppers  until  the entire  supply  of  beer  was gone.  The  woman  and  the young  
servant  began  chasing  the cat, trying to beat it, but it always  jumped  out 
of the way because  it was a manifestation  of Tilopa.  Both  were completely  
in despair  when  Tilopa  came nonchalantly  strolling  in, saying,  “Whats  
the matter  with  you?  Why  are you  so upset? ” The woman  answered,  “You

40 THE LIFE OF TILOPA
ruined  my supply  of beer!  You destroyed  my entire  business,  and I have no 
more  livelihood. ” Tilopa  replied,  “No, wait. Look  inside  the barrels,  and 
you will see that they are refilled  with  even better  beer. ” She didn ’t believe  
this but went  to see. She  found  that all the barrels  were  full of a wonderful  
new brew.  Then  she instantaneously  had great  faith in Tilopa  and became  
his fourth  disciple,  named  Nyi Od Dronma.
At another  time,  Tilopa  heard  of a butcher  who slaughtered  animals  for 
a living.  He wanted  to make  him his disciple  so he entered  the butcher ’s 
premises  and  with  a magical  trick  made  the lower  side  of beef  that  was cook ­
ing in the pot look  like the butcher ’s son and left. The butcher  came home  
and wanted  to look at the meat  that was boiling  all day; he lifted  up the 
lid and there  was his only  son, well cooked  in the pot. He was completely  
heartbroken  and was so depressed  that he couldn ’t do anything  more  for 
seven  days.  Meanwhile,  Tilopa  caused  the actual  son to disappear  from  the 
scene.  At the end of seven  days,  Tilopa  arrived. When  he returned,  he saw 
the butcher  crying  and asked,  “What ’s the matter  with  you? ” The butcher  
said, “You did it. You killed  my son and put him in the cooking  pot and 
now  he is dead. ” Tilopa  replied,  “Well,  look  at how  much  suffering  you had 
to undergo  by being  a father  and seeing  your  child  killed.  Don ’t you think  
that the fathers  and mothers  of animals  suffer seeing  their  children  being  
taken  away  from  them  and  slaughtered? ” The  butcher  was then  moved  from  
his depression  and  said,  “This  is really  true.  I’ve caused  so much  suffering  to 
those  mothers  of the animals  I’ve butchered. ” Tilopa  said, “If I could  bring  
back  your  son, would  you completely  give up your  work  as a butcher? ” The 
butcher  replied,  “Without  a doubt  I would  if you can bring  back  my  son. ” So 
Tilopa  brought  the son out of  hiding  and  said,  “This  is your  son who  is alive 
again. ” At this point  the butcher  developed  great  faith in Tilopa,  received  
all the teachings  and instructions  from him, and became  his fifth major  
disciple,  the mahasiddha  De  Je Gawa.
The next disciple  lived in Srinagar,  India.  He was a great singer  who  
was very  famous.  He was proud  of his accomplishments  and very  arrogant  
about  his talent.  He traveled  from  town  to town,  receiving  payment  for his 
performances,  and enjoyed  the great  deal of applause he received.  One  day 
he was in Srinagar  singing  his heart  out in the middle  of the village  when  
Tilopa,  having  manifested  himself  as a singer,  came  from  the other  side of 
the square,  singing  even more  beautiful  and sweet  melodies  and outdoing  
this most  famous  of singers.  A battle  arose between  them.  No matter  how 
sweetly  he sang,  the singer couldn ’t sing better  than  Tilopa.  Then  he said,

GAINING  DISCIPLES 41
“Until  now  I thought  I was the greatest  singer  in the whole  world.  Now  that 
IVe met you, I see you must  be a god, a naga , or some  other  kind  of spirit.  
How  is it that  you  can possibly  have  such  a wonderful  singing  voice? ” Tilopa  
then  showed  his real  form,  and the singer  was so astounded  with  this mirac ­
ulous  display  that he requested  to become  his disciple.  Tilopa  assented  and 
bestowed  upon  him the teachings  and instructions,  and the singer  became  
his sixth  disciple,  called  Jangden  Kukpa.
The seventh  disciple  of Tilopa  was discovered  when  Tilopa  heard  about  
an ongoing  debate  between  a great  Hindu  scholar  and a Buddhist  scholar  
who were always  debating  the law of cause  and effect  (karma).  The debate  
went  on for a long  time,  with  each  side using  excellent  logic.  At every  turn  
of the argument,  the Hindu  scholar  refuted  the law of karma,  which  is the 
cornerstone  of Buddhist  philosophy.  Tilopa  heard  about  this and entered  
the debate.  He said,  “Listen,  you two don ’t have  to continue  the debate.  Just 
take  hold  of  my garment,  and  I’ll showyou  something. ” As soon  as they  took  
hold  of  his garment,  Tilopa  took  them  to the hell realms  with  all its intense  
suffering. In particular,  there  were  great  cauldrons  full of boiling  iron  with  
the hell beings  being  tortured  and screaming  in the pot of molten  metal.  
They  were  being  stirred  by a guardian  of the hell realm. Then  Tilopa  asked,  
“What  is it they  have  done  to experience  such  great  suffering? ” The  guardian  
of  the hell realm  answered,  “These  are people  who  did not believe  in the law 
of  karma.  They  have  therefore  developed  many  negative  tendencies  and did 
many evil deeds.  The result  of these  actions  is rebirth  in the midst  of this 
boiling  metal. ” The Hindu  then became  extremely  terrified  and said, “Oh, 
I was wrong.  It’s true about  the law of  karma. ” He looked  around  and there  
was another  cauldron  completely  empty  of  beings,  but full of  boiling  metal.  
He then  asked  the guardian,  “What  is this one for? Why  is it empty? ” The  
guardian  said, “We are preparing  this for those  people  who have refuted  
the law of karma. ” The Hindu  was then  extremely  terrified  and gave  up all 
doubts  about  the law of karma  and thought that he had actually  died and 
said,  “Is this it? Is this the moment  I’m to be born  in the hell realms? ”
Tilopa  then went to one of the heavenly  realms  with the two scholars  
still holding  on to his garment  and made  them  witness  an orgy  of sensual  
delights  of the god realm.  The Hindu  looked  at this and asked why these  
beings  were  experiencing  such  pleasure  and  happiness.  The reply  came,  “It’s 
because  these  people  have  practiced  great  virtue  and developed  their  noble  
qualities. The result  of  this is the blissful  experience  of the god realm. ” Just 
over to one side there  was a celestial  palace  empty  except  for a harem  of

41 THE LIFE OF TILOPA
gorgeous  women  in it. The Hindu  asked,  “Why  is no one there  to enjoy  
this? ” They  said that they  were preparing  for the future  bliss of those  who 
had a strong  belief  in the law of  karma  and  were  developing  the noble  qual ­
ities of practicing  virtuous  behavior. ” The Hindu  was then  completely  con­
vinced  of the law of  karma  and became  Tilopas  seventh major  disciple  and 
was called  Nagatanga.
Tilopa  realized  that he had to  go to one more  place  to subjugate  a great  
sorcerer  who was extremely  vicious  and sadistic  and loved  to use his black  
magic  upon  the terrified  population.  He liked  to cast spells  on people, and 
the curse  would  kill them  immediately,  and  in general  he loved  causing  great  
harm  so that  everyone  was afraid  of him.  Tilopa  traveled  to where  he was  and 
said  something  extremely  rude  to the sorcerer,  who  was delighted  at another  
opportunity  to perform  his evil magic.  He said  to Tilopa,  “I’m going  to cast 
a spell  on you. ” Tilopa  replied,  “Go right  ahead.  What  kind  of power  do you 
have  that you can cast a spell  on me? ” So the sorcerer  cast a spell  as hard  as 
he could  while  Tilopa  just sat there  and watched  the spell taking  place.  As 
it took  place,  all of the sorcerer ’s relatives  fell sick and died  because  Tilopa  
had turned  the power  of the magic  spell upon  them.  Tilopa  then said to 
the sorcerer,  “Well,  you did your  magic, and I don ’t even  have  a toothache.  
But look  at your  relatives;  they ’re all dead. ” Then  the sorcerer  became  over­
wrought  and began crying  and weeping.  “Look  how  much  you ’re suffering  
because  your  magic has caused  the death  of ail your  relatives. ” Tilopa  then  
added,  “If I could  revive  all your  relatives,  would  you have  faith in me and 
abandon  your  ways? ” The  sorcerer  insisted  that  he would  never  again  do any 
black  magic.  Tilopa  then  revived  all his relatives  and  the sorcerer  became  the 
eighth  disciple  of Tilopa  and  was called  Luje  Denma.
Questions
Question:  What  are the higher  realms  of existence?
Rinpoche:  There  are three  higher  realms  of existence —the human  realm,  
the jealous  god  realm,  and the god realms.  These  realms  are superior  in that 
the beings  in these  realms  don ’t have to experience a great  deal of  pain  and 
suffering.  They  do experience  degrees  of happiness  and  joy because  of their  
previous  virtuous  actions.  These  states  are still  part  of  samsara  and  beings  in 
them  still maintain their  clinging  to ideas  of reality;  they  haven ’t subdued  
them  by realizing  that all phenomena  are uncreated.  In the god realm,  for

GAINING  DISCIPLES 43
example,  beings  are so distracted  by their experience  of pleasure  that they  
have no inclination  to gain liberation.  Unlike  the human  realm  where we 
have  moments  of  satisfaction,  in the god realm  there  is a continual  craving  
and continual  gratification  of  that  craving.  However,  there  are many  beings  
in the god realm  who do practice  the Dharma  because  they are not totally  
confused  by their  experience  of  pleasure.

PART  TWO
Teachings  on the 
Ganges  Mahamudra

7
Tilopa ’s Ganges  Mahamudra
Root  Text
The Title
Sanskrit:  Mahamudra  Upadesha  
Tibetan:  Phyagrgya  chenpo ’i man ngag
The Homage  
Homage  to Vajradakini!
A Brief  Explanation  of the Text
i. Although  Mahamudra  cannot  be taught,
Intelligent  and  patient  Naropa,  tolerant  of  suffering.
Who  is engaged  in austerity  and is devoted  to the guru,
Fortunate  one, do this with  your  mind.
1. The View of Mahamudra  in Six Metaphors
2. For example,  in space,  what  is resting  on what?
In one ’s mind,  Mahamudra,  there  is nothing  to be shown.
Rest  relaxed  in the natural  state  without  attempting  to alter  anything.  
If this fetter  of thought  is loosened, there  is no doubt  that  you will be 
liberated.

48 — TEACHINGS  ON THE GANGES  MAHAMUDRA
3. For example,  it is like looking  in the middle  of the sky and not seeing  
anything.
In the same  way,  when  your  mind  looks  at your  mind,
Thoughts  stop and you will attain  unsurpassable  awakening.
4. For example,  just as the vapor  that arises  from  the earth  becomes  clouds  
and dissolves  into the expanse of space,
Not  going  anywhere  else and  yet not continuing  to abide  anywhere,
In the same  way, the agitation  of the thoughts  that arise  from  the mind  
and within  the mind  is calmed  the instant  you see the mind  s nature.
5. For example,  just as the nature  of space  transcends  color  and shape.
And  therefore  is unaffected  and unobscured  by the various  colors  and
shapes  that  occur  within  it.
In the same  way,  the essence  of  your  mind  transcends  color  and shape,
And  therefore  is never  affected  by the various colors  and shapes  of  virtue  
and  wrongdoing.
6. For example,  it is like the luminous  heart  of the sun,
Which  could  never  be obscured  even  by the darkness  of a thousand  eons.
In the same  way, that  luminous  clarity  that  is the essence  of the mind  is 
never  obscured  by the samsara  of innumerable  eons.
7. For example,  just as we apply  the term  empty  to space.
In fact, there  is nothing  within  space  that  we are accurately  describing  by 
that term.
In the same  way, although  we call the mind  clear  light  or luminosity.
Simply  calling  it so does not make  it true that there  is actually  anything  
within  the mind  that is a true basis  for that  designation.
8a. In the same  way, the nature  of the mind  has from  the beginning  been  
like space.
And  there  are no dharmas  that are not included  within  that.

TILOPA ’s GANGES  MAHAMUDRA  — 49
II. The Conduct  of Mahamudra
8b. Abandoning  all physical  actions,  the practitioner  should  rest at ease.
Without  any verbal  utterance,  your  speech  becomes  like an echo,  sound  
inseparable  from  emptiness.
Think  of nothing  whatsoever  with  the mind  and look  at the dharmas  of 
the leap.
III. The Meditation  of Mahamudra
9. The body  is without  meaning,  empty  like a bamboo  stalk.
The mind  is like the midst  of  space.  It is inconceivable.
Rest  relaxed  within  that;  do not let it go or force  it to rest.
If mind  has no direction,  it is Mahamudra.
With  this you will attain  unsurpassable  awakening.
IV. The Commitments  of Mahamudra
10. Those  who  follow  tantra  and the vehicle  of the paramitas,
The Vinaya,  the sutras,  and the various teachings  of the Buddha  with  an 
attachment  for their  individual  textual  traditions  and their  individual  
philosophy
Will  not come to see luminous  Mahamudra,
Because  the seeing  of that luminosity  is obscured  by their  intention  and 
attitude.
11. The conceptualized  maintenance  of  vows  actually  causes  you to impair  
the meaning  of samaya.
Without  mental  activity  or direction,  be free of  all intentionality.
Thoughts  are self-arisen  and self-pacified  like designs  on the surface  of 
water.
If you do not pass beyond  the meaning  that  is not abiding  and not 
conceptualizing  or focusing,
Then through  not passing  beyond  that,  you do not transgress  samaya.
This is the torch  that  dispels  all obscurity  or darkness.

5© TEACHINGS  ON THE GANGES  MAHAMUDRA
V. The Benefits  of Practicing  Mahamudra
ii. If free of  all intention  you do not abide in extremes,
You  will see without  exception  the meaning  of  all the Buddhas  teachings  
from  all the sections  of the Buddhas  Dharma.
13. If  you rest in this,  you will be liberated  from  the prison  of  samsara.
If you rest evenly  within  this, all of  your  wrongdoing  and obscurations
will be burned.
For these  reasons,  this is called  the torch  of  the doctrine.
VI. The Defects  of Not Practicing  Mahamudra
14. Foolish  people  who  have  no interest  in this will only  be continually  
carried  offby  the river  of  samsara.
Those  foolish  people  experiencing  intolerable  sufferings  in lower  states  of 
existence  are worthy  of compassion.
VII. The Manner  of Practicing  Mahamudra
Kyehol
15. Wishing  to attain  liberation  from  intolerable  suffering, rely upon  a 
wise  guru.
When  the gurus  blessings  enter  your  heart,  your  mind  will be liberated.
These  phenomena  of samsara  are pointless  and are the causes  of suffering.
And  since  all of these  things  we have  been doing  are pointless,  look  at that 
which  is meaningful.
16. If  you are beyond  all grasping  at an object  and  grasping  at a subject,  
that is the monarch  among  all views.
If there  is no distraction,  that is the monarch  among  all meditations.
If there  is no effort,  that is the monarch  among  all conduct.
When  there  is no hope  and no fear, that is the final  result  and the fruition  
has been attained.

TILOPA ’s GANGES  MAHAMUDRA  — 51
17. It is beyond  being  an object  of conceptual  focus,  and the mind  s nature  
is lucidity.
There  is no path  to be traversed  and yet, in that  way,  you enter  the path  of 
buddhahood.
There  is no object  of meditation,  but if  you become  accustomed  to this, 
you will attain  unsurpassable  awakening.
18. Thoroughly  examine  mundane  things  of the world.
If  you do, you will see that none  of  them  persist.
None  of them  are capable  of  permanence.
And  that they  are all like dreams  and magical illusions.
Dreams  and magical  illusions  are meaningless.
Therefore,  generate  renunciation  and abandon  mundane  concerns.
19. Cut through  the bonds  of attachment  and aversion  toward  those  
around  you and  your  surroundings.
Meditate  in isolated  retreats,  forests, and so forth,  living  alone.
Remain  in that  state  without  meditation.
When  you attain  that  which  is without  attainment,  you have  attained  
Mahamudra.
20. For example,  if the single  taproot  of a tree with  many  branches,  leaves,  
flowers,  and fruit  is cut.
Then all will automatically  die.
In the same  way, if the root  of  mind  is cut through.
Then  all the branches  and leaves of samsara  will dry up.
21. For example,  just as the darkness  that has accumulated  over  a thousand  
eons is dispelled  by the illumination  of one lamp,
In the same  way, one instant  of the wisdom  of the clear  light  of ones  mind  
dispels  all the ignorance,  wrongdoing,  and obscurations  accumulated  
throughout  numerous  eons.
The Main Practice  of Mahamudra
Kyehol
22. The intellect  cannot  see that  which  is beyond  conceptual  mind.
You  will never  realize  that  which  is uncreated  through  created  dharmas.

51 TEACHINGS  ON THE GANGES  MAHAMUDRA
If  you wish  to realize  that  which  is beyond  the intellect  and is uncreated.  
Then  scrutinize  your  mind,  and strip  awareness  naked.
13. Allow  the cloudy  water  of thought  to clarify  itself.
Do not attempt  to stop  or create  appearances.
Leave  them  as they  are.
If  you are without  acceptance  and rejection of external  appearances,
All that appears  and exists  will be liberated  as Mahamudra.
Z4. The all-basis  is unborn,  and within  that unborn  all-basis,  abandon  bad 
habits,  wrongdoing,  and obscurations.
Therefore, do not fixate  or reckon,  but rest in the essence  of the unborn  
nature.
In that  state,  appearances  are fully  apparent.
And  within that  vivid  experience, allow  concepts  to be exhausted  or 
dissolve.
Z5. Complete  liberation  from all conceptual  extremes is the supreme  
monarch  of  views.
Boundless  vastness is the supreme  monarch  of meditations.
Being  directionless  and utterly  impartial  is the supreme  monarch  of 
conduct.
Self-liberation  beyond  expectation  is the supreme result.
16. For a beginner,  it is like a fast current  running  through  a narrow  
ravine.
In the middle,  or after  that,  it becomes  like the gentle  current  of the 
Ganges  River.
In the end, it is like the flowing  of all rivers  into the mother  ocean,
Or, it is like the meeting  of the mother  and child  of  all the rivers.
Z7. If those  of  little  intelligence  find they  cannot  remain  in that  state,
They  may  apply  the technique  of  breathing  and emphasize  the essence  of 
awareness.
Through  many  techniques  such  as gazing  and holding  the mind,
Tighten  your  awareness  until  it stays  put.
Exerting  effort  until  awareness  comes  to rest in its nature.

TILOPA ’S GANGES  MAHAMUDRA  — 53
z8. If  you rely upon  a karmamudra,  the wisdom  of  bliss and emptiness  will 
arise.
Enter  into the union,  having  consecrated  the upaya  and the prajna.
Slowly  send  it down,  coil it, turn  it back,  and lead it to its proper  place.  
Finally  cause  it to pervade  your  whole  body.
If there  is no attachment  or craving,  the wisdom  of bliss and emptiness  
will appear.
19. You  will possess  longevity  without  white  hair,  and you will be as 
healthy  as the waxing  moon.
Your  complexion  will be lustrous,  and you will be as powerful  as a lion.  
You will quickly  attain  the common  siddhis,  and  you will come to attain  
the supreme  siddhi  as well. 33
Dedication  and Aspiration
These  instructions  of the essential  point  of  Mahamudra,  may  they  abide  in 
the hearts  of fortunate  beings.
May  these  essential  instructions  in Mahamudra  abide  in the hearts  of 
worthy  beings.
The Colophon
This  was bestowed  on the banks  of the Ganges  River  by the great  and glo­
rious siddha  Tilopa,  who had realized  Mahamudra,  upon the Kashmiri  
pandit  Naropa,  who was both  learned  and realized,  after he had engaged  
in twelve  hardships  or austerities. This  was translated  and written  down  at 
Pullahari  in the north  by the great  Naropa  and the great  Tibetan  translator,  
the king  among  translators,  Marpa  Chokyi  Lodro.

8
Introduction
In this chapter  I am going  to discuss  an important  teaching  that  Tilopa  gave 
to his pupil  Naropa  on the banks  of the Ganges  River  in India.  This  teaching  
is called  the Ganges  Mahamudra,  and  Tilopa  gave  this teaching  to Naropa;  
later  Naropa  taught  it to Marpa,  who brought  it to Tibet  and translated  it 
into Tibetan.  This short  text is an instruction  in Mahamudra  meditation  
and is considered  to be the source  of the tradition  of Mahamudra  in the 
Kagyu  lineage.  So I feel very fortunate to have the opportunity  to explain  
it to you.
Mahamudra
Mahamudra  is a practice  that  can be done  by anyone.  It is an approach that 
engulfs  any  practitioner  with  tremendous  blessings  that  makes  it very  effec ­
tive and easy  to implement.  This is true in our present  time,  and especially  
true for Westerners,  because  in the West  there  are very  few obstacles to the 
practice  of Mahamudra.  When  His Holiness  the Sixteenth  Karmapa,  Rigpe  
Dorje,  went  to spread  the Buddhist  teachings  to the West, he  was asked  by 
a student,  “Since  the Kagyu  teachings  are now spreading  throughout  the 
world,  what  Tibetan  texts  should  be translated  into  English? ” His Holiness  
answered  that the first text of great  importance  should  be Moonbeams  of 
Mahamudra  by Dakpo  Tashi  Namgyal. 34 It should  be translated  as soon  as 
possible  because  it is a very  important  source  for the study  and practice  of 
Mahamudra.  So in accordance  with  His Holiness  s vision,  the Moonbeams  
of Mahamudra  was translated  and is now  readily  available  in English.
From  time to time I have suggested  and encouraged  Dharma  students  
to read  Moonbeams  of Mahamudra  and have said, “It is a very  good  book.

56 — TEACHINGS  ON THE GANGES  MAHAMUDRA
You  should  read  it.” Often  students  will respond,  “Well,  it is too long  and  it 
doesn ’t seem  to be so important.  It is too dry.” Or something  like  that.  So to 
encourage  students  to actually  use this text,  I have  taught  on it extensively. 35 
However,  in order  to suit those  who  need  a more  abbreviated  explanation  of 
Mahamudra, I will teach  this present  text, the Ganges  Mahamudra,  which  
is very  concise  and also full of blessings.
What  makes  Mahamudra  so special?  There  exists  extremely  profound  
practices  such  as the Six Limbs  of the Completion  Stage  of the Kalachakra  
Tantra  and the renowned  instructions  on the Great  Perfection  (Tib.  Dzok-  
chen) that are really  extraordinary.  But for ordinary  practitioners  there  
seem to be some  problems  in implementing  these  instructions.  For exam ­
ple, sometimes  practitioners  try to practice  Dzogchen  in a dark retreat.  It 
is possible  by spending  a month  or two in total  darkness  that  you can have  
uncommon  experiences  and realization,  but it is also quite  possible  that an 
ordinary  practitioner  might  go completely  crazy  in a dark  retreat.  Or if the 
practitioner  were to do the Leap Over  (Tib.  togal)  practice,  which  uses the 
rays of the sun as an external  condition,  it is possible  to develop  extraor ­
dinary  and ensuing  wisdom  from gazing  at the sun in a careful  way, but 
sometimes  when  it isn ’t done  properly,  there  will be permanent  damage  to 
the eyes.  Mahamudra,  in contrast,  has no such  dangers. It is a practice  that 
does  not bring  about  these  problems  and  can be done  in a state  of  relaxation  
and ease.
The term  Mahamudra  in Sanskrit  was translated  into Tibetan  as phyag  
gya chenpo  (pronounced  chakgya  chenpo).  The  first  Sanskrit  syllable,  maha , 
which  means  “great, ” was translated  into Tibetan  as chen  po. The second  
Sanskrit  syllable,  mudra,  means  “a seal, ” for example,  the seal that a king  
affixes  to a proclamation  to show  it was made  by the king and covers  his 
whole  kingdom.  The Tibetan  syllable  for mudra  is phyag  gya (pronounced  
chak  gya),  which  has the additional  meaning  of “vast. ” One  of the implica ­
tions  of phyag  gya is that the true nature  of phenomena,  the emptiness  of 
all phenomena,  is vast and unfathomable.  If this same  nature  is recognized  
within  the mind  of  the practitioner,  then  this recognition  in its vastness  is a 
seal that  pervades  all of  a person ’s experience.  That  is why  mudra  is called  “a 
seal” with  the connotation  of vastness.  The reason  Mahamudra  is called  the 
“great  seal ” is that it encompasses  something  far greater  than  a monarch ’s 
seal on a document.  Mahamudra  is actually  the greatest  seal of  all.
The siddhas  who translated  mudra  from  Sanskrit  into Tibetan  added  a 
third  word:  phyag.  On a literal  level, the word  phyag  is the honorific  word

INTRODUCTION 57
for “hand. ” However,  the uncommon  meaning  in this context  is somewhat  
more profound  because  phyag , as the honorific  word for “hand, ” is also 
applied  to the hands  of the Buddha,  the hands  of bodhisattvas,  the hands  
of  ones  guru,  and so forth.  Moreover,  this term  is also used  in an ordinary  
sense  to refer  to cleaning  tools,  such  as a broom,  which  is called  aphyag-ma.  
Also  someone  who  uses  a broom  might  simply  be called  aphyag.  So the term  
phyag  in Mahamudra  has the connotations  of being  both the sacred  word  
for “hand ” and also “that which  cleans. ” Putting  these  two connotations  
of the word  pbyag  together,  we get the symbolic  meaning  “the work  that 
is done  by the hands  of buddhas,  bodhisattvas,  and gurus  is to cleanse  or 
purify  the minds  of their  students. ” For example,  this term  could  also be 
used  by the king  s ministers  to describe  actions  that promote  goodness  or 
healthiness  in the lives of the people  they govern,  which  is also an act of 
cleansing.  Putting  this all together,  the  practice  of  Mahamudra  has a cleans ­
ing effect,  in the sense that it purifies,  or cuts through,  ones disturbing  
emotions,  and that is why  it is called  phyaggya  chenpo.  So, that ’s the reason  
why  the term  Mahamudra  was translated  in this way.
There  are even more  implications  of the Tibetan  translation  of Maha ­
mudra . In commentaries,  you will find that  the first  syllable  of  the Tibetan  
word  phyag  gya also means  “emptiness ”—phyag  refers  to the emptiness  that 
is to be realized.  The second  syllable, (which  itself  could  simply mean  
“a sea” or “vastness ”), refers  to the wisdom  that realizes  emptiness.  What  
is being  pointed  out in phyag  gya is that these  two are not separate  from  
each  other —Mahamudra  is the inseparability  of emptiness  and wisdom  or 
the inseparability  of space  and wisdom, which  is indicated  by the Tibetan  
word  chenpo,  which  means  “great. ” The point  is that the supreme  pacifica ­
tion of all suffering  and all causes  of suffering— the disturbing  emotions  
and so forth —is the wisdom  of emptiness.  It is emptiness  itself  that is the 
stable  clarity  of  Mahamudra.  And  the word  chenpo,  “great, ” also implies  the 
nonduality  of emptiness  and the wisdom that recognizes  emptiness,  which  
indicates  the all-pervasive  quality  of this realization.
The Importance  of the Upadeshas
We have the extreme  good  fortune  to have  this opportunity  to study  Tilo-  
pas Ganges  Mahamudra,  which  is also called  Mahamudra  Practice  Instruc ­
tion (Mahamudra  Upadesha).  This  practice  instruction  (Skt.  upadesha ) is an 
extremely  useful  and  beneficial  text  to study.  When  we examine  the practice

58 — TEACHINGS  ON THE GANGES  MAHAMUDRA
of the great  siddhas  of Tibet,  we find that in their  study,  and also in their  
practice,  they emphasized  not the Buddhas  original  teachings  but rather  
the commentaries  on the Buddhas  teachings  (Skt.  sbastras ) composed  by 
the great  siddhas  and  scholars  of  the past.  One  might  think  that  the original  
teachings  of the Buddha  would  be far more  important  and  practical  to use. 
However,  in Tibet,  there  was a greater  emphasis  placed  on both the study  
and the practical  implementation  of the shastras for  the simple  reason  that 
these  commentaries  contain  the condensed  essence  of the Buddhas  teach ­
ings and were therefore  more  convenient  to study  and implement.
Of the various  types of commentaries,  the ones that are of the great ­
est importance  are those  called  “practice  instructions. ” These  are the most  
important  texts  because they  actually  explain  how  we go about  meditation  
practice —how  we are to practice  the generation  stage,  the completion  stage,  
and so forth.  By emphasizing  these  texts and their practical  implementa ­
tion, many  individuals  have been able to obtain  the realization  of Vajra- 
dhara  in one  lifetime  and  in one  body.  There  are also  others  who,  after  living  
a life devoted  to practice,  have  been  able to attain  the state  of  Vajradhara  in 
the intermediate  state  (Tib.  bardo ) immediately  upon  their  death.
Some  advantages of these practice  instructions  are that they are easy to 
remember,  easy to understand,  and easy to apply.  Therefore,  upadeshas,  
especially  those  in the style  of a spiritual  song,  are of  foremost  importance.  
The importance  of these  dohas  is indicated  by the fact  that  practically  every  
siddha  from  both  India  and  Tibet  has left us with  a wealth  of  such  spiritual  
songs.
The Importance  of Tilopa ’s Dohas
These  upadeshas  were  composed  by all of the great  siddhas  of India,  includ ­
ing  the eighty-four  mahasiddhas,  for the benefit  of  their  immediate  disciples  
and  also  for their  students  and  future  generations.  There  are quite  a number  
of dohas.  However,  the ones that bear the greatest  blessings  and are the 
most  beneficial  are those  composed  by Tilopa.  This  is because,  unlike  other  
teachers,  Tilopa  met Vajradhara  face to face and received  the transmission  
of Mahamudra  directly  from him. Therefore,  Tilopas  spiritual  songs  are 
extremely  important.  In particular,  the Ganges  Mahamudra  is perhaps  the 
most  important  of  the upadeshas  on Mahamudra,  especially  for those  prac­
titioners  who have  had the good  fortune to practice Mahamudra,  but also 
for the world  in general.

INTRODUCTION 59
Some  of  you may not know  who or what  Vajradhara  is and wonder,  “Is 
Vajradhara  a person  or not, and if Vajradhara  is not a person,  what  is he 
or she? ” As you know,  what  we call the Dharma  are the teachings  of the 
Buddha  Shakyamuni.  Therefore,  the fundamental  source  and teacher  of  all 
Buddhists  is Buddha  Shakyamuni.  As you also  know,  Buddha  Shakyamuni  
was born  about  500 BCE in India  and attained  buddhahood  at Bodh  Gaya.  
The Buddha  first turned  the wheel  of Dharma  at Varanasi,  then  taught  for 
about  forty  years,  and then  passed  into  parinirvana  at Kushinagara  around  
the age of eighty.  Saying  that the Buddha  passed  into parinirvana means  
that although  his physical  body  passed  away,  his mind  and  wisdom  did not 
pass away; that is, the qualities  of his enlightenment —the wisdom  that 
knows  the nature of each and every  thing  and the variety  of phenomena,  
the compassion  that is dedicated  to the liberation  of all beings,  and the 
actual  ability  to bring  about  the liberation  of all beings—these  three  quali ­
ties of  wisdom,  compassion,  and ability —will never  change.  This  unchang ­
ing wisdom  mind  of the Buddha  is called  the “dharmakaya. ” What  passed  
away  at Kushinagara  2,500  years  ago is called  a "supreme  nirmanakaya. ” The 
dharmakaya  does not stop and does not change. Because  of its unchanging  
quality,  the dharmakaya  is permanent,  and because  it is permanent,  we call 
the dharmakaya  “Vajradhara. ” The  Sanskrit  word  vajra  means  “permanent, ” 
or “that  which  does not change, ” and the syllable  dbara  means  “that  which  
holds, ” so “Vajradhara ” means  that the mind  of the Buddha  holds  this wis­
dom  beyond  fluctuation  or change.
The dharmakaya  Vajradhara  is that awakened mind  of loving-kindness,  
wisdom,  and the ability  to actually  benefit  beings.  In that sense,  it is the 
root  of all actual  achievement  of benefit  for beings.  But, on the other  hand,  
it cannot  itself  act directly  because the dharmakaya  cannot  be experienced  
directly  by ordinary  human beings.  For the dharmakaya  to benefit  beings,  
it must  therefore  display  itself  in a different  form and this form is called  
the “nirmanakaya. ” We say that the Buddha  who lived 2,500  years  ago as 
a human being  is the “supreme  nirmanakaya ” because this appearance  was 
experienced  by ordinary  beings.  The Buddha  can also present  himself  to 
realized  beings  in the form  called  the “sambhogakaya, ” which  is a pure  envi­
ronment or pure realm  available  to persons  with  purified  perception.  The 
Vajradhara  who is depicted  in paintings  as being  blue in color,  holding  a 
vajra  and bell crossed  in front  of him, dressed  in fine clothes,  and sitting  
cross-legged  on a lotus  is the sambhogakaya  Vajradhara.  This  sambhogakaya  
form  is the display of the dharmakaya  Vajradhara  in a pure environment,

6o TEACHINGS  ON THE GANGES  MAHAMUDRA
which  can be experienced  by those  with  pure  perception.  Bodhisattvas  on 
any of the ten bodhisattva  levels can encounter  and receive  instruction  and 
transmission  from  the sambhogakaya. 36 This is exactly  what happened  in 
Tilopa  s case.  He encountered  the sambhogakaya  Vajradhara  in a pure  realm  
and received  instruction  from  him.
This means  that Tilopa  was quite  unlike  other  mahasiddhas  in that  he 
would  sometimes  go to the  pure realms  to receive  instruction  and at other  
times  appear  in impure  realms  to teach  what  he had received.  Normally,  
bodhisattvas  and mahasiddhas  may  choose  to be reborn  in either  a pure  or 
an impure  realm,  but if they  are born  in a pure realm,  then they remain  in 
that  pure  realm,  and if they  are born  in an impure  realm, then  they  remain  
for the duration  of that  life in that impure  realm.  They  do not usually  have  
the ability  to move  freely  from  one to another  within  a given  life. Tilopa,  
however,  had this ability,  which  is extraordinary  because  he was one of the 
few people  who  is supposed  to have  been  able to do this, and in doing  so he 
received  avast  number  of  tantras  and  transmissions  in the pure  realms  from  
Vajradhara  and  he then  brought  them  back  and taught  them  to his disciples  
in our world.
Among  all of Tilopas  teachings  on Mahamudra,  the one that has the 
greatest  significance  is this short  text, which  is referred  to as the Maha ­
mudra  Upadesha.  This practical  instruction  is significant  both in its title 
and its explanations.  It is taught  in the sutras  and in the commentaries  on 
the sutras  that for ordinary  individuals  to attain  buddhahood,  they must  
first  go through  three  periods  of  innumerable  eons  in which  they  gather  the 
accumulations  of merit  and wisdom.  The significance  of the term  upadesha  
in the title is that it refers  to practical  methods  that are so efficacious  that 
they  obviate  the need  for such a long  path to enlightenment.  This text of 
instruction  by Tilopa,  who  is regarded  as being  like the king  of  all mahasid ­
dhas, is quite  concise,  consisting  of only twenty-nine  stanzas.  It is really  
valuable  because  every  line in it has a distinct  meaning  that is worthy  of 
reflection  and investigation.  We should  read it again  and again  and think  
about  what  it means  and use it as a basis for our actual  practice  of medi ­
tation.  We might  have a number  of different  reactions  to this doha.  For 
example,  by working  with  this instruction and  practice,  we might  develop  
some  realization  of  our mind  s nature.  We might  have  received  a great  deal 
of instruction  from  various teachers and have  some  realization  from  these.  
But if we have some recognition  of our mind  s nature,  we should  not be 
satisfied  with  just that. We should  use this experience  as the basis for a

INTRODUCTION 61
continued  lifelong  application  of mindfulness  and alertness  until  we have  
attained full awakening  so that we can truly  free ourselves  from  suffering  
forever.  Or we might  think,  “What  exactly  is this  Mahamudra,  what  is this 
nature of mind?  I want to  know  what  it is, and I want  to realize  it.” If we 
have that inquisitiveness  and that kind of enthusiasm,  it will bring  us to 
the recognition  of  the mind  s nature.  Or we might  not be that  interested  in 
Mahamudra  practice  to begin  with.  That  is why  Tilopa  gives  us reasons  for 
why  we should  be extremely  interested  in Mahamudra.  The reason  for being  
interested  in Mahamudra,  being  interested  in working  with  our own  mind  
directly,  is that only by directly  realizing  our mind  can we be of genuine  
and great  benefit  to ourselves  and to  others.  In any case, whether  we pres­
ently  have  some  realization  of  our mind  s nature  or not, and  whether  we are 
particularly  interested  in this or not, if we look  at our mind,  we will get it.
Explanation  of the Title
The  actual  title  of  this text  is th t Mahamudra  Upadesha , but it is commonly  
known  as the Ganges  Mahamudra  because  it was taught  on the banks  of 
the Ganges  River  in India.  Tilopa  couldn ’t give this particular  Mahamudra  
teaching  to all his students —it was given  only  to his foremost  disciple,  the 
pandita  Naropa,  in a very  simple  and direct  way. Tilopa  gave  Naropa  these  
teachings  after  he put Naropa  through  twelve  great  trials.  This particular  
teaching  is considered  to be the cause  of Naropa  s realization.
In general,  some  Buddhist  texts  are named  after  the student  who  requests  
the instruction,  others  are named  after  the topic  taught,  and still others  are 
named  after the place  where  the instruction  was given.  This text  was obvi­
ously  named  after  the place,  the banks  of  the sacred  Ganges  River.
The Title
Sanskrit:  Mahamudra  Upadesha
Tibetan:  Phyagrgya  chenpo ’i man  ngag
This  text  begins  with  the name  of  the text  in Sanskrit,  followed  by the name  
of the text in  Tibetan. This is almost  always  the case with texts that have  
been  translated  into Tibetan  from  Sanskrit. 37

6z — TEACHINGS  ON THE GANGES  MAHAMUDRA
The Homage
Homage  to Vajradakini!
The text proper  begins  with  a homage.  There  are different  editions  of this 
root  text  in Tibetan,  and the first  difference  between  the two  most  common  
editions  is found  in this first line. In some editfons,  it says, “Homage  to 
glorious  coemergence, ” and others  say, “Homage  to Vajradakini. ” The text 
we are using  begins  with  the latter.  The  homage  is to “Vajradakini, ” which  
means  that it is to Mahamudra  or the Prajnaparamita,  where  Vajradakini  
is the mother  of  all buddhas  or, one could  say, the realization  that  produces  
all the buddhas.
A Brief  Explanation  of the Text
Each  section  of the text  begins  with  a brief  topical  analysis  or overview.  The 
headings  used  here  are from  a commentary  composed  by the Third  Gyalwa  
Karmapa,  Rangjung  Dorje,  which  we are using.  The first  verse  by Tilopa  is 
the promise  to teach.
i. Although  Mahamudra  cannot  be taught,
Intelligent  and patient  Naropa,  tolerant  of  suffering,
Who  is engaged in austerity  and is devoted  to the guru,
Fortunate  one,  do this with  your  mind.
Because  Tilopa  is presenting  the view of direct  valid  cognition  or direct  
experience,  he begins  by saying,  “Although  Mahamudra  cannot  be taught ” 
because  Mahamudra  is on the ultimate  level of reality  and therefore  can­
not be expressed  in words  or even in concepts.  As was said by Shantideva,  
“Absolute  reality  is not an object  of the intellect  because the intellect  itself  
is an object  of conventional  reality. ” The intellect  is an aspect  of ignorance  
and  therefore  the intellect  is always  ignorant. 38 The  intellect  is always  wrong  
and never  sees phenomena  correctly  and thus never  perceives  things  just as 
they are. The intellect,  being  a symptom  of delusion,  can perceive  only in 
a deluded  way. So, we cannot use the intellect  to experience  Mahamudra.  
Therefore, Mahamudra  cannot  be described  in conceptual  terms.  The only  
thing  that  we can do is practice  meditation  and allow  the innate  intelligence  
that  is aware  of itself  to emerge.

INTRODUCTION  — 63
The second  line refers  to his student  Naropa,  who underwent  many  aus­
terities  while  he was searching  for Tilopa,  and also while  he was attending  
Tilopa.  He underwent  what  are called  the “twelve  major  and twelve  minor  
hardships  or austerities. ”39 The reason  for Naropas  earnest  seeking  and 
hardship  was that even though  he had already  met a number  of extraordi ­
nary  teachers  and mahasiddhas  before  meeting  Tilopa,  his yidam  had pre­
dicted  that  Tilopa  was to be his karmically  destined  root  guru.  His search  
for Tilopa  was based  upon  strong  confidence in the  prediction  that he had 
received.  In this  verse,  Tilopa  refers  to Naropa  as “a fortunate  one. ” “Fortu ­
nate ” or “worthy ” here means  that Naropa  had such  great  faith and devo ­
tion and was able to engage  in these  austerities  and find his teacher.  It was 
appropriate  for Tilopa  to give these  instructions  to Naropa  because  of his 
faith  and devotion;  only  a person  with  faith  and devotion  would  be capable  
of understanding  the teachings  meaning  and actually  implementing  these  
teachings  as a basis  for practice.
Devotion  plays  two functions  in the practice  of Mahamudra.  One pro­
vides  an immediate  benefit,  and the other  is the main  function  of  devotion.  
The immediate  benefit  occurs  sometimes  when  you supplicate  the root  and 
lineage  gurus  with intense devotion  and  your  outlook  changes  completely.  
In an instant, there  is a great  change  in how  you experience the world,  and 
the result  is right there;  you will make  considerable  progress.  For exam ­
ple, if you have had no experience  of your mind  s nature,  then whatever  
recognition  and experience  you have had will increase  with devotion.  So 
that is the short-term  benefit  of devotion,  which  is simply  that devotion  
brings  blessings,  and blessings  bring  about  progress  in your  practice.  But 
the true function  of devotion  is even more  basic than that. It is that the 
more  trust,  the more  interest  and confidence  that you have in something,  
the more  effort  you will put into it. If you have trust  in Mahamudra  and 
you believe  it is authentic  and trustworthy —that  is the extent  that  you  will 
actually  engage  in practicing  it. If you lack devotion  or are suspicious  of 
Mahamudra,  thinking,  “How  could  it be so easy, how  could  this actually  
work —something  so simple  as this? ” or you do not trust  it, obviously  you 
are not going  to practice  it. And  when  someone  takes  on this uninterested  
attitude,  no matter  how  many  times  Mahamudra  is taught  to them  and no 
matter  how much  instruction  they receive,  it is obviously  not going  to do 
them  any good.  If  you have ioo percent  confidence  in your  teacher  and ioo 
percent  confidence  in Mahamudra,  you  will have ioo percent  diligence.  If 
you have  50 percent  confidence,  you will  have  50 percent  diligence.  Clearly,

64 — TEACHINGS  ON THE GANGES  MAHAMUDRA
this  is actually  common  to all endeavors,  whether  they  are spiritual  or mun ­
dane.  To summarize,  the more  confidence  you have  in something,  the more  
you will put into  it, and the more  you will get out of  it.
It is important  to understand the  reason  why Naropa  underwent  these  
austerities.  He did not undergo  them  for any  mundane  reason,  such  as want ­
ing food  or clothing.  He underwent  them  to find and please  the guru.  It is 
necessary  for a student  to prove  to a teacher  that  he or she has enough  con­
fidence  and trust  in him  or her and  in the instructions  to be able  to undergo  
such  austerities  because  only  someone  who  has that  much  longing  and trust  
can actually  practice  this kind  of teaching.  If a student  diligently  practices  
the teaching,  there  will be a positive  result;  if a student  does not practice  it, 
there  will obviously  be no point  in the whole  process.  Therefore, the ability  
to practice  depends  upon  the ability  to undergo  hardships.  And  if  there  is no 
willingness  to undergo  hardships,  then  this is an indication  that  the student  
has no trust  in either  the guru  or the instructions  given  by the guru.
Generally,  in Buddhism  there  is no belief  that  physical  suffering  is a pre­
requisite  for practice  and for awakening.  Yet Naropa  and Milarepa  both  
underwent  inconceivable  physical  suffering  in the process  of their  training.  
They  underwent  this not for the sake of the suffering  itself  but to show  
their  complete  trust  and  confidence  in their  guru.  Because  Naropa  was  abso ­
lutely  certain  that  if  he succeeded  in receiving  instructions  from  Tilopa,  he 
would  attain  full enlightenment,  this gave  him the  courage to undergo  all 
these  austerities.  So in this first  verse,  Tilopa  thanks  “ intelligent  and  patient  
Naropa. ” In the last line,  when  Tilopa  says to “do this with  your  mind, ” he 
means  that now that he has proven  himself,  if he does  this, he will realize  
the fruition  of this  practice.
Questions
Question:  In the stories  of Naropa  and Milarepa,  it seems  that before  they  
actually  realized  the nature  of mind,  each one of them  underwent  tremen ­
dous difficulties.  In modern  times,  do we need to undergo  similar  hard ­
ships?  Is this somehow  a preparation  for us to leap over?
Rinpoche:  A distinction  needs  to be made  between  the simple  recogni ­
tion of the mind  s nature and the full realization  of the mind  s nature.  In 
order  to recognize  the nature  of your  mind,  heroic austerities  like those  of 
Milarepa  are not necessary.  But in order  to fully  realize the nature  of your

INTRODUCTION  — 65
mind,  these hardships  might  be necessary.  For example,  when  Milarepa  
first received  instruction  from  Marpa,  he instantly  recognized  the nature  
of  his mind  because  that is what  Marpa  had  explained  to him and  Milarepa  
understood  it. But he had to go through  all the subsequent  austerities  and 
practice  in order  to fully  realize  what  he had already  recognized.  But you 
should  not think  that the success  or failure  of your  practice  is based  upon  
your  ability  or inability  to do what  Milarepa  did. This  is because  any  degree  
of realization  of the mind  s nature  will make  your practice  and your life 
completely  worthwhile  and meaningful.  If you can achieve  the complete  
realization  that Milarepa  did, of course,  that would  be magnificent.  But 
even having  50 percent  or 15 percent  or 5 percent  or even 1 percent  of this 
realization  would  still be extraordinary.  You should  not think  that you are 
in some  way  disqualified  as a practitioner  merely  because  you cannot  equal  
the experience  of Milarepa.  Any amount  of Mahamudra  practice  you do 
will be very  beneficial.

9
The View of Mahamudra  in Six Metaphors
Overview  of the Text
According  to Rangjung  Dorje  s analysis,  there  are seven  main  topics  pre­
sented  in the Ganges  Mahamudra.  Different  editions  of the Ganges  Maha ­
mudra  have  different  orders  of these  topics,  but the most  common  order  is 
the following:  (i) the view  of Mahamudra,  (2) the conduct  of Mahamudra,  
(3) the meditation  of Mahamudra,  (4) the samaya  of Mahamudra,  (5) the 
benefits  ofpracticingMahamudra,  (6) the  problems  of  not  practicing  Maha ­
mudra,  and (7) the practice  of  Mahamudra  itself.
I. The View of Mahamudra  in Six Metaphors
The first of these  seven  major  topics  is the “view, ” and the function  of the 
view is to reveal  what  is literally  called  “the ground ” or we could say, “the 
foundation  ” The ground  here means  the ground  on which  everything  
occurs  and  within  which  everything  arises.  The  ground  includes  the ground  
of meditation,  the ground  of conduct,  the ground  of  samaya,  and so on.
The  ground  is the true nature  of phenomena  (Tib.  nye lufy,  and this view  
can be pointed  out in two  ways:  the common  view  and  the uncommon  view. 
The common  view  consists  of  the view  arrived  at through  logical  reasoning  
or inferential  valid  cognition.  This  consists  of  using  logic  to determine  that 
emptiness is the nature  of phenomena.  The uncommon  view,  which  is the 
view  of this practice  instruction,  uses direct  experience  or direct  valid  cog­
nition.  The reason  this teaching  is called  the “uncommon  view ” is that one 
can then avoid  using  the intellect  because  ultimate reality  is not an object  
of  the intellect —the intellect  itself  belongs  to relative  truth  or conventional

68 TEACHINGS  ON THE GANGES  MAHAMUDRA
reality.  This  means  that  because  the intellect  is itself  bewildered  or confused,  
it cannot transcend  its own realm of bewilderment.  So in the uncommon  
view,  we simply  look  directly  at our own  mind  to determine  its nature.  This  
is using  direct  experience  to arrive at the view  and that is a special  charac ­
teristic  of the view  of Mahamudra.
The view  of Mahamudra  is presented  in terms  of six examples  or met­
aphors  in Tilopas  spiritual  song. Perhaps  it would  be more  correct  to say 
that there are six metaphors  rather  than six examples  because,  as you will 
see, space  is used  as a metaphor  in the first,  the second,  and fourth  points  of 
this topic.  This  shows  one of  the main  differences  between  a poetic  composi ­
tion and the spontaneous  composition  of a spiritual  song  (doha).  Normally,  
when  we compose  a poem,  we write  part of the poem,  then look  at it, and 
then  improve  it a little  bit. Later  we examine  it again and improve it a little  
more,  and so on. Nowadays,  we would  do this on a computer.  In contrast,  a 
spiritual  song  is spontaneously  sung  with  a melody  by the lama  and is never  
changed  after  it is first  sung.  So there  is less attention  paid  to the restrictions  
of  poetic  traditions,  which  is the reason  why  the same  metaphor  of space  is 
used  again and again.
First  Metaphor : Space  as an Example  of the  Absence  
of Solidity
2. For example,  in space,  what  is restingon  what?
In one ’s mind,  Mahamudra,  there  is nothing  to be shown.
Rest  relaxed  in the natural  state  without  attempting  to alter  
anything.
If this fetter  of thought  is loosened,  there  is no doubt  that  you will 
be liberated.
Tilopa  begins  the first metaphor  by using  the image  of space  to communi ­
cate something  about  the ground  of Mahamudra.  “Space ” by definition  is 
physical  emptiness;  it is an expanse.  As such,  it is the fundamental  medium  
that allows  other  things  to be present. 40 But because  space  is nothing  in 
and of itself,  it does not require  any kind  of support.  Space  does not have  
to rest on something  or be supported  by something.  Therefore, space  itself  
cannot  support  anything  else. Nothing  can rest on space.  Things  can only  
rest within  space.  In the same way, because  Mahamudra  is emptiness,  
the absence  of substantiality  of the mind,  it cannot  be seen or identified.

THE VIEW  OF MAHAMUDRA  — 69
Because  it is not anything,  it cannot  be pointed  out as being  anything.  This  
is described  in the second  line that says,  “In ones  mind,  Mahamudra,  there  
is nothing  to be shown. ”
Now,  if there  is nothing  to be shown  and nothing  to be said about  it, 
what  are we to do? The next  line tells  us to “rest relaxed  in the natural  state  
without  attempting  to alter anything. ” When  we hear that we cannot  use 
logical  inference  to realize  Mahamudra  and it cannot  be taught  at all, it 
makes  understanding  Mahamudra  sound  hopeless.  But in fact  it is not. We 
can know  the meaning  of  Mahamudra  and  we can realize  it without  logical  
reasoning.  We also do not need to have it pointed  out to us by a teacher.  
The only thing  that we need to do is “rest relaxed  in the natural  state ”— 
meaning  that  we should  rest in the nature  of our mind  without  making  any 
alteration  to it.
When  the text says, “in ones mind, ” it should  be taken  to refer to our 
mind  just as it is. Normally,  when  we think  about  our mind,  we think  of it 
as being  full of  worries,  desires,  regrets  of  what  we have  done  wrong,  and  so 
on. Indeed,  our mind  from  time  to time  may  seem  to us to be just like that.  
But, in fact, that is not the true condition  of our mind.  Saraha  has said,  
“Homage  to the mind  that is like a wish-fulfilling  jewel. ” A wish-fulfilling  
jewel  is a legendary  object  that is supposed  to be able to grant  a person  any 
wish  he or she desires.  The reason  the mind  is compared  to a wish-granting  
jewel  is that if we look at our mind,  we will come  to realize  the nature  of 
everything.  And  in order  to do this,  we do not need  to alter  our mind.  “Not 
altering  the mind ” means  that we simply  rest in our mind  as it is. If our 
mind  is something,  then rest in that something;  if our mind  is nothing,  
then rest in that nothing.  Do not feel that  you have  to turn it into nothing  
if it seems  to be something.  Of course,  the mind  is not something  because  
it has no substantial  characteristics.  And  yet it also is not nothing  because  
it is continually  engaging  in lucid  cognition.  It is simply  our mind,  and we 
just  rest in it as it is without  attempting  to make  it into anything  other  than  
what  it is. And  if we can do that,  we will realize  Mahamudra.
Maybe  it is easy  to rest our mind  in a relaxed  way in its own  nature  with ­
out altering  it.41 But maybe  it is very  difficult  to do so. We might  ask, “How  
do I do this? I have never  done  this before.  I do not know  how  to relax  my 
mind  in its own nature. ” This is not an unreasonable  question.  We nor­
mally  take what  we experience— for example,  strong  disturbing  emotions,  
confused  thoughts,  and  so forth,  to be solid  and real. The last two lines  of 
this verse  tell us that this is an incorrect  belief  because  believing  that these

70 TEACHINGS  ON THE GANGES  MAHAMUDRA
experiences  truly  exist  and  are solid  and real is exactly  what  binds  us or puts 
us in bondage.  If we can let go of this incorrect  belief,  then automatically  
we will experience  liberation.
Second  Metaphor : Space  as an Example  of Practicing  
Mahamudra
The second  point  concerning  the view  also uses  space  as a metaphor.
3. For example,  it is like looking  in the middle  of the sky and not 
seeing  anything.
In the same  way,  when  your  mind  looks  at your  mind,
Thoughts  stop and you will attain  unsurpassable  awakening.
In the previous  verse,  space,  or the sky, was used  as an image  to illustrate  
that  Mahamudra  has no solidity. In this verse,  the sky is used  to communi ­
cate what  happens  when  Mahamudra  is practiced.  When  we look  into the 
middle  of a cloudless  sky, we don ’t see anything  at all; there  is no form  to 
be seen.  Whereas  when  we look  at the ground,  of course,  we see all sorts  of 
things.  This  example  is used  to indicate  what  it is like  when  we look  for our 
own mind  in the practice  of Mahamudra.  From  a logical point  of view,  it 
makes  no sense  that  our mind  is looking  at our  mind.  It is like thinking  that 
a sword  can cut itself  or we can stand  on our  own  shoulders.  Nevertheless,  in 
actual  experience,  it is not only  quite  possible  for mind  to look  at or observe  
mind;  it is not that  difficult.  The reason  that  we can do this is that  our mind  
is very,  very  close  to us; it is inseparable  from  us. In that  sense,  we could  say 
that it is not extremely  difficult  to find our mind because  it is right  there  
with  us all the time —it is the same  cognition  and the same  awareness  that 
we have always had.
However,  if  our mind  were  a solid  object  and  had some  kind  of  substanti ­
ality,  then  when  we looked  at it, we would  see something.  Yet,  when  we look  
directly  at our mind,  we don ’t see anything.  The  Third  Karmapa,  Rangjung  
Dorje,  in his Aspirational  Prayer  for  Mahamudra,  says,  “It is not existent — 
even the victorious  ones  have not seen it.” This means  that, from  a certain  
point  of view,  we can say that there  is nothing  there, so there  is nothing  to 
see. The reason  we don ’t see anything  when  we look directly  at the mind  
is not because  it is obscured  in some  way or that we don ’t know how  to 
look  at it or that  we have  to overcome  obstacles  to see it directly.  That ’s why

THE VIEW  OF MAHAMUDRA 71
Rangjung  Dorje  said that even the victorious  ones (the buddhas)  do not 
see it.
We usually  explain  Dharma  in terms  of  view,  meditation,  and conduct.  
There  are two  approaches  to the  view;  the first  approach  is the sutra  approach.  
In this approach,  we can develop  understanding  and confidence  in the view  
through  analysis  and inferential  reasoning. We can become confident  that 
we have  sufficiently  analyzed  a particular  topic  and  that  we have  determined  
its nature.  The second  approach  to understanding  the view  is the Vajrayana  
approach  when  “mind  looks  at our mind ”; this approach  relies  on our direct  
experience  in our meditation.  It is this second  approach  to the view that 
is referred  to in the last two lines of verse 3. In other  words,  using  direct  
experience,  we can see the mind  directly,  and yet we will not see anything.
How  does it actually  happen  that looking  at the mind  somehow causes  
thoughts  to dissolve  or stop,  as it says in the verse?  There  was a very  import ­
ant terton  called  Yonge  Mingyur  Dorje  (1641-1708)  who  discovered  a prac­
tice or sadhana  called  Sampopang  (“Proper  Container ”). In that  liturgy,  he 
talks  about  the nature  of  anger  and makes  the point  that  anger  is meaning ­
ful only  if  it is outwardly  directed.  We can ’t have  anger  that  is not  outwardly  
directed,  which  means  that if we turn  anger  in on itself,  if we look  directly  
at our anger,  then it doesn ’t seem  to be anything.  We can ’t find  where  the 
anger  is. We can ’t discover  what  shape  it has or what  color  it is or discern  
any other  substantial  quality  that it has. If anger  has none  of  these  substan ­
tial qualities,  then  what  does it have? What  could  it possibly  be? What  we 
think  of as being  “anger ” is merely  the appearance of anger  and not really  
anything  at all. It is like looking  for the wind  while  looking  at the empty  
sky— we can ’t see anything.  So if  we look  at our own  anger,  we won ’t see it, 
and that  pacifies  the anger.  In the Foundation  Vehicle,  this same  experience  
is described  as the selflessness,  or egolessness,  of persons.  In the Mahayana  
Vehicle,  this is described  in terms  of  emptiness.  But  whether  this  was taught  
by the Buddha  or not, when  we look  at our  own  mind,  we can directly  expe ­
rience  the mind ’s essential  emptiness.
This insubstantiality,  or emptiness,  is true not only  of anger  but also of 
other  disturbing  emotions  such as desire,  attachment,  jealousy,  pride,  and 
so forth.  It is not only true of negative  thoughts,  it is also true of positive  
thoughts.  Whatever  form  a thought  takes, if we look  directly  at it, we will 
see that in its nature  it is nonexistent,  and that recognition  pacifies  the 
thought,  or causes  it to cease. 42
Normally,  we never  look  at our mind  in this way.  From  the time  we wake

TEACHINGS  ON THE GANGES  MAHAMUDRA 71 —
in the morning  until  the time  we go to sleep,  our mind  is just a stream  of  one 
thought after  another,  one thought  producing  a second,  which  produces  a 
third,  and so forth,  and that is our  whole  life.  Not  only  that,  but  while  some  
of these  continuous  thoughts  are virtuous,  most  of them  are unvirtuous.  
Under  the influence  of negative  thoughts,  we engage  in harmful  actions  
that cause  us to wander  around  and around  in cyclic  existence  (samsara),  
and we are often  completely  miserable.  We can see that thoughts  that are 
expressions  of delight  and uplifted  happenings  are, in fact, comparatively  
rare for us. We spend  most  of our time thinking  about  how miserable we 
are. Well,  if we rest in Mahamudra,  all of that stops.  It is through  the pro­
cess of  stopping  our continuous  internal  dialogue  that  we gradually  develop  
awakening.
The last two lines  “When  your  mind  looks  at your  mind,  thoughts  stop  
and  you  will  attain  unsurpassable  awakening ” mean  that  regardless  of what  
is arising  in your mind,  if you look directly  at it, it will dissolve.  When  
thoughts  appear  in your  mind,  they  do so by arising  and then  remaining  as 
an experience  and then  dissolving.  If at any point  in this process you  look  
directly  at the thought,  it will dissolve.  For example,  when  a thought  or 
emotion  arises,  you look  to see whence  it arose,  how  it arose,  and what  this 
arising  means  in the case  of  a thought.  If  the thought  is still  present,  you  look  
to see where  it is and what  it is and how  it is. Finally,  when  this thought  or 
emotion  dissolves,  you look  to see where  it is going,  how  it is going  and  what  
it is that  is going.  If you  look  at the thought  in this  nonconceptual  manner,  it 
will  dissolve;  it will not be there  any more.  And  if  you cultivate  this  practice  
again and again, then  gradually  it will lead to liberation  from  the bondage  
of  thought,  which  is unsurpassable  awakening.  Therefore,  Tilopa  says,  “You 
will attain  unsurpassable  awakening. ”
We sometimes  experience  this  view  of  Mahamudra  and  we sometimes  do 
not.  When  you  do not experience  it, do not become  discouraged.  We should  
not think,  “This  is impossible.  I cannot  practice  this.  Even  if  I try to practice  
this, I will not realize it.” This  process is quite  possible  and quite  workable.  
But we really  need to emphasize  this in our practice.  We need to actually  
take the time to look at our mind  because  by doing  so we can experience  
and realize it directly.
Often  we think  thoughts  like, “Of  course,  the mahasiddhas  can realize  
this.  That  is what  makes  them  mahasiddhas.  But I cannot  possibly  do this. 
It is okay  to think  about  and be impressed  by the qualities  of  mahasiddhas,  
but we have  to remember  that mahasiddhas  started  out as ordinary  practi ­

THE VIEW  OF MAHAMUDRA 73
tioners  like  ourselves,  and they  became  mahasiddhas  by doing  this  practice.  
So it is not impossible.
Third  Metaphor : Mist Illustrates  the  Way Thoughts  
Dissolve
The third metaphor  describes  Mahamudra  using a slightly  different  
image— mist  or clouds— illustrating  the way thoughts  dissipate  or dissolve  
by themselves:
4. For example,  just as the vapor  that arises  from  the earth  becomes  
clouds and dissolves  into the expanse  of space,
Not  going  anywhere  else and  yet not continuing  to abide  anywhere,  
In the same  way, the agitation  of the thoughts  that arise  from  the 
mind  and  within  the mind  is calmed  the instant  you see the 
mind  s nature.
While  we are still within  samsara,  we have a lot of mental  and  physical  
suffering.  Mental  suffering  consists  of disturbing  emotions  arising  in our 
mind  that make  us suffer  at the time they arise.  They  make  us miserable  
right  away  and  cause  us to become  even  more  miserable,  depressed,  and  wor­
ried  later  on. And  there  are, of course,  all kinds  of physical  suffering:  damage  
or harm  to our body,  loss of possessions,  and so on. Physical  suffering  and 
mental  suffering  can be prevented  through  the practice  of Mahamudra.
How  the practice  of Mahamudra  relieves  and prevents mental  suffering  
is explained  in this verse  with a new image.  Tilopa  says, “For example,  just 
as the vapor  that arises  from the earth  becomes  clouds  and dissolves  into 
the expanse  of space. ” He continues,  “In the same way, the agitation  of 
the thoughts  that arise  from  the mind  and within  the mind is calmed  the 
instant  you see the mind  s nature. ”
The mental  suffering  that  we experience  consists  of all the thoughts  that 
arise  in our minds,  with  most  being  of the nature  of  suffering— thoughts  of 
worry,  agitation,  and so on—as well as all the various  disturbing  emotions  
that  are not only  unpleasant  at the time  they  arise  but also are the causes  of 
future  suffering  as well.  At any  given  time,  we are both  experiencing  suffer ­
ing and creating  the causes  of future  suffering.  If we ask, “Can we just stop 
this? ” we will find that  we cannot.  Even  though  we try to stop this process,  
it will  still continue  to happen.

74 TEACHINGS  ON THE GANGES  MAHAMUDRA
In this case,  what  is called  mind  s nature,  which  is also called  “original  
mind ” (Tib.  thamelgyi  shepa),  is luminous  clarity  because  the agitation  of 
thoughts  that come  out of the mental  sixth  consciousness  is calmed  by this 
luminous  clarity.  In this verse,  original  mind  is distinguished  from  all the 
different  thoughts,  conceptualizations,  mental  formations,  and  experiences  
that  we undergo  that arise  from  the mind.  These  include  the fifty-one  types  
of  mental  factors,  including  the five mental  factors  that  must  be present  for 
a volitional  action  to occur,  the various  virtuous  and unvirtuous  factors,  
and so forth.
In the practice  of Tranquillity  meditation,  we are trying  to weaken  the 
power  of our thoughts.  By making  these  thoughts  less strong  and influen ­
tial in our thinking,  we begin  to relax  into the state of tranquillity.  In the 
practice  of Mahamudra,  these  thoughts  are not suppressed  or weakened,  
rather  they are purified.  This is done  by examining  the direct  experience  
of our mind,  which  is that it has no substantial  existence  but definitely  has 
this innate  cognitive  clarity.  Whether  we call this “luminous  clarity, ” “true 
nature  of  the mind, ” “emptiness, ” “clarity, ” “the unity  of  emptiness  and  clar­
ity,” or “the unity  of  space  and  wisdom, ” this is not  experienced  as something  
that exists  or as something  that does not exist.  Rather  it is a genuine  and 
direct  experience  that causes  the waves  of discursive  thought  to naturally  
dissolve.
The practice  of Mahamudra  is an alternative  to attempting  to forcibly  
stop this seemingly  ceaseless  flow of thoughts,  kleshas,  and suffering.  It 
entails  looking  at the nature  of the thoughts  that arise,  which  enables  us to 
transcend  them.  When  a thought  arises  in our  mind,  we can look  directly  at 
it to see what  exactly  it consists  of: What  is a thought?  Does  a thought  have  
a certain  shape,  a certain  size, a certain  substance?  Does  it have a certain  
color?  If it has any of these  characteristics,  exactly  what  shape,  color,  size, 
and so on does  it have?  If it does not have  any of these  characteristics,  what  
characteristics,  if  any,  does  it have?  If  a thought  had any  such  characteristics,  
we would  surely  be able to see them  because  they  arise in the mind.  But,  in 
fact, thoughts  do not have  any  such  characteristics;  they  are by nature  pure.  
Previously,  I quoted  the mahasiddha  Saraha  as saying,  “Homage  to the mind  
that  is like a wish-fulfilling  jewel. ” The  significance  of  the image  of  the wish-  
fulfilling  jewel  is that it is something  that is completely  flawless  and always 
beneficial. 43 The mind,  which  we erroneously  regard  as somehow  inher ­
ently  miserable,  is, in fact, in its true nature,  flawless  and inherently  free 
of misery.

THE VIEW  OF MAHAMUDRA 75
There  is a song  of instructions  that Milarepa  gave to Paldarbum  that is 
found  in The  Rain  of Wisdom.  This  song  consists  of  five images  of which  one 
is appropriate  here. Milarepa  said, “Look  at the depths  of the ocean,  and 
meditate.  Look  at the mind,  and meditate  without thought. ” In response  
Nima  Paldarbum  asked  Milarepa,  “I can look at the ocean,  but what  do 
I do with  all those  waves?  I can look  at my mind,  but what  do I do with  all 
those  thoughts? ” This  means  that  she can look  at the mind,  nevertheless  she 
is disturbed  by the thoughts  arising  within  it. Milarepa  s response  was, “If 
you can meditate  on the ocean,  then  you will experience  that the waves  on 
the ocean ’s surface are merely  the expression  of the ocean  itself.  If you can 
meditate  on the mind,  then  the thoughts  that arise  are nothing  other  than  
the expressions  of the mind. ”
In other  words,  if we see our own mind,  then  what  we see is the mind ’s 
essence  or emptiness.  When  we see that,  we will also see that the nature  of 
whatever  thoughts  arise  in the mind  are also emptiness.  When  this is expe ­
rienced  directly,  these  thoughts  dissolve  in their  own place,  which  means  
right there.  Thoughts  are not driven  out nor do they go somewhere  else. 
They  do not  go away;  they  simply  dissolve  naturally  because  they  are directly  
perceived.  So, that is how  the third  image of mist illustrates  the dissolving  
of thoughts.
It is very important  to practice  these  instructions,  both  in formal  med ­
itation  and in our daily  activities,  by using  the practice  of mindfulness.  It 
is important  to remember  that each of us presently  has the extraordinary  
opportunity  of  being  a human  being  with  eighteen  special  characteristics. 44 
Modern  life is very  busy,  and it seems  that we lead full, active,  and produc ­
tive lives  and therefore  have  no time  to meditate  or that  when  we spend  our 
time in the practice  of meditation, we are then dissatisfied  with the qual ­
ity of our daily lives.  Many  students  are always  saying  to me, “Oh, I don ’t 
have time to practice, ” or “My life is no good. ” From  a Mahamudra  point  
of view,  however,  there is no such contradiction.  Mahamudra  should  be 
practiced  formally  as much  as possible  in sitting  meditation,  but when  you 
cannot  do that,  you always  have  the opportunity  to apply  these  instructions  
to whatever  activities  you are doing.  There are  many  illustrations  of this in 
the history  of our lineage,  such  as Tilopa  who practiced  continually  while  
pounding  sesame  seeds  for a living and through  that practice  he attained  
full awakening.  This is an important  example  for us. So practice  accord ­
ing to this example,  and don ’t let yourself  be overpowered  by disturbing  
emotions.

j6 — TEACHINGS  ON THE GANGES  MAHAMUDRA
Fourth  Metaphor : Space  as an Example  of Not Being  
Obscured
The next  stanza  again  uses space  as the image:
5. For example,  just as the nature  of space  transcends  color  and shape,  
And  therefore  is unaffected  and unobscured  by the various  colors  
and shapes  that occur  within  it,
In the same  way, the essence  of  your  mind  transcends  color  and 
shape,
And  therefore  is never  affected  by the various  colors  and shapes  of 
virtue  and  wrongdoing.
Here  we have  to be clear  about  which  of  the various  meanings  of  space  or 
sky we are referring  to. In the Abhidharmakosha,  Vasubandhu  explains  the 
two main  uses of the term  space.  One  meaning  of  space  is something  that is 
not anything;  it is not a composite  of anything  and therefore  has no visible  
characteristics,  and that is called  “empty  space. ” The other  use of the term  
space  is to describe  the sky that is perceived  as being  blue. In these  images  
(of Tilopa  s doha),  we are not talking  about  the blue sky; so when  we say 
that space  in its nature  has no color,  it should  not be seen  as a contradictory  
statement.  In fact, in the Abhidharma,  there  is a specific  term  used  to refer  
to the blue sky, which  is ornamental  space  because  it is an object  of  visual  
perception.  In addition,  we can think  of  space  as having  a shape,  as being  a 
certain  aperture  that  is governed  by the shape  ofwhat  it is within.  For  exam ­
ple, we can think  of a square  hole as a square  space.  But Tilopa  is talking  
about  space  itself,  which  has no shape,  just as it has no color  and therefore,  
as the second  line says, it is never  obscured  or affected  by the various  colors  
and shapes.
The third  line goes on: “In the same  way, the essence  of  your  mind  tran­
scends  color  and shape. ” We have discussed  the specific  type of space  that 
Tilopa  is referring  to, and in the same  way,  we have  to distinguish  between  
two things  that could  be meant  by mind.  When  we talk about  mind  in 
the context  of  conventional  reality  (Tib.  kunsop),  we are talking  about  how  
we experience our mind as being  filled  with  lots of thoughts  of happiness,  
suffering,  and so forth.  But in this verse  we are talking  about  the nature  
or essence  of the mind,  so the mind  is being  discussed  in the context  of 
ultimate  truth  or reality  (Tib.  dbndam).  On the ultimate  level, there  are

THE VIEW  OF MAHAMUDRA 77
no characteristics  of color  and shape  to the mind;  in other  words,  there  is 
nothing  that  would  indicate  any  kind  of solidity  or true  existence.  Although  
we tend  to regard  our mind  as being  truly  existent,  when  we directly  expe ­
rience  its awareness,  we find mind  has no solidity,  no color,  no shape,  and 
so forth.  When  using  logical  reasoning  as the path —whether  in the Rang-  
tong  or the Shentong  school —there  is a lot of  discussion  about  the conven ­
tional  and ultimate  levels  of reality.  In these  explanations,  it is often  said 
that conventional  reality  is experienced  within  confusion  in the mind  and 
ultimate  reality  is experienced  without  that confusion.  But in the view  of 
Mahamudra,  there  is little  discussion  of conventional  and ultimate  reality.  
While  it is true  that  ultimate  truth  is beyond  conceptual  mind,  nevertheless,  
emphasizing  the fact that  conventional  truth  is the experience  of  confusion  
makes  ultimate  truth  sound  like it is something  that is so far away  that it 
can ’t be directly  experienced.  The purpose  here  is to explain  that  we reach  
realization  from  the direct  experience  of the nature  of our own mind.  For 
that reason,  the two truths  or realities  are not used in the example  in this 
text. This  verse  explains  that when  you experience  the nature  of your  own 
mind,  it is something  that  is extraordinarily  peaceful,  extraordinarily  pleas ­
ant, and blissful.
It is often  said  that  virtuous  actions  produce  states  of happiness  and  harm ­
ful actions  produce  states  of  misery.  When  we experience  the mind ’s nature,  
we find it possesses  an inherent  blissfulness that transcends  the temporary  
experiences  of happiness  or suffering  produced  as a result  of our actions.  
Because  this total peace  is experienced,  there  is no need to hope  for tem­
porary  states  of pleasure  produced  by virtuous  actions  and there  is also no 
need  to fear  temporary  states  of  suffering  produced  by negative  actions.  The 
last lines of this verse  say that the nature  of mind  is “never  affected  by the 
various  colors  and  shapes  ofvirtue  and  wrongdoing.  ” The  implication  of  this 
verse  is that the practice  of Mahamudra  will help alleviate  our  physical  suf­
fering  because  the essential  quality  of  our mind  is like space  and therefore  is 
inherently  unaffected  by what  occurs  within  it. When  we engage  in wrong ­
doing,  we accumulate  karmic  seeds  (Tib. bakchak ) and these  karmic  seeds  
or latencies  that  are stored  in the eighth  consciousness  will  not disappear  by 
themselves,  but will ripen,  that  is, express  themselves,  later.  And  when they  
ripen,  we experience  them  as upheaval, impediments,  and  various  kinds  of 
unpleasant  circumstances.  However,  since  the experience  of suffering  occurs  
within  our  mind,  and  because  the nature  of  our  mind  is itself  free of  solidity  
and the characteristics  of a solid  object,  then when  we rest in that nature

78 — TEACHINGS  ON THE GANGES  MAHAMUDRA
through  the practice  of Mahamudra,  we will not experience  what would  
otherwise  be experienced  as suffering  at all. Or, if we experience  it as suf­
fering,  it will  be far less intense  than  it would  be in ordinary  circumstances.
The fundamental  reason for the practice  of  meditation  is that it initially  
pacifies  mental  suffering  and  then  it also eventually  helps  us deal  with  exter ­
nal and physical suffering  as well. But we might  ask, “Does  it do anything  
else? Does  one actually  generate  any qualities  or virtues  through  the prac ­
tice of meditation? ” The answer is yes. Although  the nature  of our mind  is 
emptiness,  it is also free of  possessing  any basis  for the presence  of inherent  
defects;  at the same  time,  the mind  is not absolutely  nothing.  As we have  
said  before,  in the Heart  Sutra  it says,  “No eyes,  no ears,  no tongue,  no nose,  
no tactile  consciousness, ” and so on. And it goes through  a list of all the 
things  that you might  think  to exist— all the relative  truths  that appear  to 
you— and  points  out that  all of  them  have  no inherent,  substantial  existence  
and therefore  are empty.  The Buddha  taught  that this mind is empty,  but 
he also taught  in the sutras  that buddha  nature  (Skt.  sugatagarbha :), which  
is to say, emptiness,  which  is the nature  of  our mind,  contains  within  it the 
inherent  potential  for all of the qualities  of buddhahood  to develop.
Fifth  Metaphor : Sunlight  as Mind ’s Being  both  
Empty  and Luminous
The  fifth  metaphor  primarily  explains  that  the nature  of  the mind  is not  just 
empty  but  also  has luminous  clarity  at the same  time.  The  primary  metaphor  
used  in this stanza  is the sun.
6. For example,  it is like the luminous  heart  of the sun,
Which  could  never  be obscured  even by the darkness  of  a thousand  
eons.
In the  same  way, that luminous  clarity  that is the essence  of the mind  
is never  obscured  by the samsara  of innumerable  eons.
The  Rangtong  school,  which  is primarily  an explanation  from  the second  
turning  of  the wheel  of  Dharma  and is connected  with  the Prajnaparamita  
teachings,  places  great  emphasis  on emptiness  (Skt.  shunyata ) and, in par­
ticular,  on the fact that all phenomena  are inherently  empty.  The reason  for 
this emphasis  on emptiness  is that  the largest  misconceptions  that  ordinary  
persons  possess  are the false belief  in and conviction  about  the apparent

THE VIEW  OF MAHAMUDRA 79
reality  of outer  objects  and the false belief  that this “self, ” this “I,” is solid  
and real. When  we believe  that the self is real and that external  objects  
are also real, we simply  fail to understand  “the true nature  of things ” (Skt.  
dharmata ). Failing to do so, we will not abandon  our obscurations  and 
consequently  remain  in samsara.  To remedy  this fixation  on solid  and real 
appearances,  the concept  of emptiness  is explained  in terms  of the sixteen  
emptinesses,  or the fourteen  emptinesses. 45 In the same  way, presenting  
outer  phenomena  as being  like the mist  in an early  morning  and so forth  is 
a remedy  for this incorrect  fixation  that our mind  has. We normally  think,  
“My mind  truly  exists.  My mind  is solid. ” This incorrect  idea  must  first  be 
remedied  by studying  emptiness.
Initially,  it is appropriate  to emphasize  only  emptiness  as a remedy  for the 
fixation  on appearances  of self  and  external  phenomena.  However,  if we ask, 
“Are all things  or phenomena  merely  empty? ” the answer  would  be “No.” 
In the sutra  tradition,  this is described,  for example,  when  Nagarjuna  said,  
“If someone  with intelligence  is mistaken  about  emptiness,  they will not 
achieve  spiritual  development. ” In the tantric  tradition,  Sarahasaid,  “Those  
who  fixate  on the solidity  of phenomena  are like cattle.  But those  who  fixate  
on an absence  of  solidity  are even  dumber. ” These  points  emphasize  the fact 
that  while  it is true that the essential  nature  of all things  is emptiness,  the 
essential  nature  itself  is not just empty —it is natural  clarity.
Lets return  to verse 6, which  presents  a metaphor  using  the sun. This  
verse  states,  “It is like the luminous  heart  of the sun,  which  could never  be 
obscured  even by the darkness  of a thousand  eons. ” This means  that our 
mind has an innate  luminous  clarity  or lucidity,  and when  this lucidity  is 
revealed,  then in an instant  that lucidity  illuminates  whatever  it encoun ­
ters. It does  not matter  how  many  eons  that  the mind  has been  in darkness  
because  in the instant  that the lucidity  of mind  is present,  the mind  is com­
pletely  illuminated.
Since  the nature  of the mind  is always luminous  clarity,  even though  we 
are in samsara  and  even  though  we have  dwelled  in samsara  for innumerable  
eons,  when  this nature  is recognized,  the ignorance  of  the mind  is dispelled  
automatically  simply  because  ignorance  is the absence  of  recognition  of  that 
luminous  clarity.  That inherent  lucidity  of our mind  is always  there,  and 
the recognition  of it is, therefore, all that is necessary  in order  to dispel  our 
ignorance.  Therefore,  when  we talk about  buddha  nature,  what  we mean  is 
this inherent luminous  clarity  that is the potential for awakening.  Famil ­
iarizing  ourselves  with  this inherent  luminous  clarity  allows  us to gradually

80 — TEACHINGS  ON THE GANGES  MAHAMUDRA
attain  buddhahood.  The  qualities  of  the mind,  with  its inherent  lucidity,  are 
never  lost and never  affected.  They  have always  been available  to us, to be 
recognized  through  the practice  of meditation.
Although  we refer  to the mind  as being  empty  or insubstantial  in order  to 
explain  and  emphasize  that  the mind  is without  a true  substantial  existence,  
it is actually  not true  that the mind  is just  emptiness.  And  although  we refer  
to the mind  as luminosity  or clear  light  because it has the inherent  quality  
of luminous  clarity,  causing  us to say that the mind ’s nature  is wisdom,  the 
mind  is not actually  a thing.  Therefore,  the Buddha  taught  that, on the 
ultimate  level  of reality,  the true nature  of the mind  is inexpressible,  incon ­
ceivable,  and indescribable.  This means  that  we cannot  accurately  say that 
the mind  is either  something  or nothing.  In order  to describe  the mind ’s 
emptiness,  we make  it sound  as though  it were  nothing.  In order  to describe  
the mind ’s luminous  clarity,  we make  it sound  as though  it were  something.  
But in fact, the nature  of the mind,  buddha  nature,  or Mahamudra  is inex­
pressible  because  it is inconceivable  and can be understood only through  
direct  experience.
It is often  harder  to recognize  the mind ’s luminous  clarity  than  the mind ’s 
essential  emptiness.  The  reason  why  luminous  clarity  is more  difficult  to rec­
ognize  is not that  it is more  subtle  but rather  that it is the basic  ground  of all 
experience and has always  been  there.  We are so habituated  or used  to this 
clarity  that  we actually  don ’t trust  what  we are experiencing  as this clarity.  
When  we are told  that  the nature  of  the mind  is this  inherent  luminous  clar­
ity, we don ’t believe  that this could  refer to the  basic  cognitive  clarity  that 
we experience  our  mind  to be all the time.  We expect  it to be more  brilliant,  
more  like an electric  light  or a flame  of a candle.  But luminous  clarity  here 
refers  simply  to the inherent  capacity  of  the mind  to experience  appearances  
and to be able to think.  When  this capacity  is increased  through  practice,  
it develops  into the twofold  wisdom  of a Buddha— the wisdom  of under ­
standing  the nature  of phenomena  and the wisdom  of understanding  the 
variety  of  phenomena.
In verse  7 of  the  Aspirational  Prayerfor  Mahamudra,  the Third  Karmapa,  
Rangjung  Dorje,  says:
The  ground  of  purification  is the mind  in itself.
Which  is the unity  of  emptiness  and luminous  clarity.
That  which  purifies  is the Vajrayoga  of  Mahamudra.
That  which  is to be purified  is the adventitious  stains  of confusion.

THE VIEW  OF MAHAMUDRA Si
The “ground  of purification ” refers  not to what  should  be purified  but 
rather  to the nature  of mind,  which  is continuous.  The “unity  of emptiness  
and  luminous  clarity ” means  that  the nature  of  emptiness  is luminosity  and 
the nature  of luminosity  is emptiness.  The “Vajrayoga  of Mahamudra ” is 
the recognition  of that fundamental  nature  that is the ground,  in other  
words,  the recognition  that the mind  s nature  is a unity  of emptiness  and 
luminosity.  The last line explains  what  is to be purified,  which  is the adven ­
titious  stains  of confusion. ”46 This refers  to all of the things  that arise in 
the mind —coarse  and subtle  thoughts  and disturbing  emotions.  They  con­
tinually  arise in our experience  but, in fact, they come  from  nowhere  and 
abide  nowhere  because  they  have  no solidity.  However,  if  these  thoughts  and 
feelings  are believed  to really  exist, they  take hold  of us and bind  us.
The unity  of emptiness  and luminous  clarity  is also clearly  taught  in the 
sutra tradition.  While  this tradition  uses inferential  reasoning  to do this, 
nevertheless,  the explanations  are of such clarity  that they can assist  our 
understanding.  For example,  Mipham  Rinpoche  wrote,  “This appearance  
does  not  lose  its vividness  as appearance. ” He meant  that  we constantly  expe ­
rience  things —for example,  visible  forms  such  as people,  houses,  mountains,  
gardens,  and so forth,  and yet even though  they  are very  vivid  experiences,  
they are actually  without  any inherent  essence  or nature.  Then Mipham  
goes  on to say, “This  emptiness  does  not lose  its status  as being  empty.  Inter ­
dependence  arises  unimpeded. ”47 Normally,  when  we hear  about  the unity  
of appearances  and emptiness,  we think  that these two things  are either  
contradictory  to each  other  or somehow  alternate  back  and  forth.  We think  
that emptiness  and appearances  are two different  things,  and we tend to 
imagine  one  thing  being  empty  and  another  thing  appearing,  or as phenom ­
ena appearing  sometimes and being  empty  at other  times.  But, in fact, it is 
not like this at all. The true nature  of phenomena  is unchanging,  and yet 
this in no way obstructs  the interdependent  manifestations  of this nature.  
Of  course,  this  explanation  is in the language  and  style  of  the sutras,  but that 
does  not mean  that it is not helpful  to our understanding.
When  we say that the nature  of the mind  is empty,  this in no way con­
tradicts  the fact that we experience  the mind  as an unimpeded expression  
of luminous  clarity.  And  although  we experience visible  images,  auditory  
sounds,  and  so forth,  this in no way  obstructs  the fact that  our  mind  s nature  
and the nature  of what is experienced  are empty.  This is what  is meant  by 
unity —the aspect  of emptiness  and the aspect  of clarity  are neither  sepa­
rate nor mutually  obstructive.  In this  verse,  this is communicated  using  the

image  of sunlight.  Up to this  point,  these  various  stanzas  have  described  first 
the emptiness  of the mind ’s nature  and then  the luminosity  of the mind ’s 
nature.8l — TEACHINGS  ON THE GANGES  MAHAMUDRA
Sixth  Metaphor : The Inexpressibility  of the  
Mind ’s Nature
The seventh  verse  of the explanation  of  the view  is concerned  with  the inde-  
scribability, or inexpressibility,  of the mind ’s nature:
7. For example,  just as we apply  the term  empty  to space,
In fact, there  is nothing  within  space  that  we are accurately  
describing  by that term.
In the same  way, although  we call the mind  clear  light  or 
luminosity,
Simply  calling  it so does  not make it true that there  is actually  
anything  within  the mind  that is a true basis  for that 
designation.
This  first  line says,  “For  example,  just as we apply  the term  empty  to space, ” 
making  the point  that there  is nothing  within  space  that  we can accurately  
describe.  In the same  way, saying  that the mind  has “clear  light ” (Tib.  osef) 
or “luminous  clarity ” does  not make  it true that there  is actually  anything  
within  the mind  that  is a true  basis  for that  designation.  In order  to describe  
the mind in a rough  way we use these  terms  for convenience,  but we have  
to always  remember  that the terms  do not actually  describe  what  the mind  
really  is. That  can only be experienced  directly  through one ’s own insight.  
Marpa  the Translator  described  this as “like a mute  person  tasting  sugar. ” 
The mute  person  has a very  clear  experience  of the taste  of sugar  but is inca­
pable  of  describing  it. In the same  way,  Marpa  said  that  he had an experience  
of the nature  of his mind  in his training  under  Naropa  but was unable  to 
express  it in words.
The  point  of  this  verse  is that  we cannot  describe  this  fundamental  nature  
of what  the mind  is really  like. This means  that even when  a guru  tries to 
communicate  this  experience  to his or her  students  by saying  that  the mind ’s 
nature  is “the unity  of emptiness  and clarity, ” this is just an approximate  
indication  and does  not really  fully  describe  what  the mind ’s nature really  
is. When  we actually  experience  the mind ’s nature,  we have  nothing  to say

THE VIEW  OF MAHAMUDRA  — 83
about  it because  there  is no conceptually  graspable  quality  that  we can then  
describe  with  words,  language,  or thought.
8a. In the same  way, the nature  of the mind  has from  the beginning  
been like space,
And  there  are no dharmas  that are not included  within  that. 48
To summarize,  up to this point  the text has been  dealing  with the first 
main  topic  of the view  of  Mahamudra,  which  has been explained using  six 
analogies:  one of clouds,  another  of the sun, and four  analogies of space — 
each  one used  to describe  the mind.  The  four  analogies  using  space  each  had 
a distinct  meaning.
The Third  Gyalwa  Karmapa,  Rangjung  Dorje,  wrote  an outline  of this 
text. In his outline,  he details  the intention  behind  these  four  uses of  space  
as a metaphor.  The first time space  is used,  he points  out that it refers  to 
the insubstantial  nature  of mind,  or Mahamudra.  The second  time space  
is used,  he points  out that when  you look  directly  at your mind,  thoughts  
vanish  as though  into space.  The third  time  that space  is used,  he points  out 
that although  you may  engage  in positive  and negative  activities that create  
obscurations  of the mind,  nothing  that you do in the way of positive  and 
negative  actions  can obscure  the luminous  clarity  of  the mind  s true  nature.  
And  the fourth  time  that space  is used,  he points  out that the nature  of the 
mind  is inexpressible.
Verse  8 is a summary  of the presentation  of the view and is a summary  
mainly  of the six analogies.  The text says that the nature  of  the mind  is like 
space,  and therefore  everything  that  you experience  is included  within  that 
space  of the mind.  This  is an answer  to the implicit  question,  “Even  though  
the mind  s nature  is as you have explained  it, what good  does it do me to 
know  that?  My  problems  come  from  outside.  My  enemies  are not  within  my 
mind;  my enemies  are outside  me. Sickness,  harm  from the elements,  and 
disasters  all come  from  outside.  What  use is it for me to meditate  upon  the 
nature  of my mind?  The nature  of my mind  is not the problem. ”
Although  the nature  of your mind  is not your  problem,  there  is great  
benefit  to meditate  on it. While  it may appear  that disasters  and so forth  
come  from  outside  yourself,  in fact, most  true disasters  start from  within.  
The way that we experience  things,  which  consists  basically  of intoxicated  
delight,  depressive  misery,  intense  aggression,  and addictive  desire  and 
attachment —all of these things —comes  from our mind.  And as soon as

84 — TEACHINGS  ON THE GANGES  MAHAMUDRA
we recognize  the nature  of  our  mind,  all of  these  afflicted  states  are pacified.  
It is not that  external  disasters  need  to be avoided  and  external  enemies  need  
to be subdued,  rather  it is the internal  enemies  and  the internal  disasters  that 
need  to be subdued.
Shantideva  said  that if you attempt  to avoid  suffering  by subduing  exter ­
nal enemies  and other  external  sources  of  suffering,  you find  that,  for every  
one that  you subdue,  two arise  to take its place.  He says that the only  thing  
that will actually  work  in reducing  suffering  is to subdue  the inner  enemy,  
which  is your  own  aggression.  And  if you subdue  your  own  aggression,  then  
the external  enemies  will not arise. In The Way of the Bodhisattva,  Shan ­
tideva  gives the example  of walking  barefoot  in the forest  and discovering  
that there  are thorns  and rocks  that hurt  your feet. If you think  that the 
solution  is for you to cover  the forest  floor  with  leather  to protect  you,  you 
are wrong  because  you  can never  cover  the whole  world  with  leather.  On the 
other  hand,  if  you  just  cover  the bottom  of  your  own  feet  with  leather,  it has 
the same  effect  as having  covered  the entire  forest  floor  or the entire  world  
with leather.  Similarly,  you cannot control  the external  world  completely,  
so you must  instead  learn  to control  your  own  mind.
Thus,  we need  to arrive  at a correct  view  of the nature of the mind  and 
moreover  we need  to experience  the nature  of our mind.  And  according  to 
the view  of  Mahamudra,  that is also  why  we must  have  direct  experience  of 
the mind ’s nature  rather  than  a mere  conceptual  understanding.
Questions
Question:  Is the teaching  of buddha  essence,  or buddha  nature,  a practice  
that is taught  just in the Vajrayana?
Rinpoche:  The concept  of buddha  essence  is not particularly  part of  just 
the Vajrayana  teachings.  The Buddha  taught  two types  of doctrines,  one 
called  “sutra ” and the other called  “tantra. ” The basic  difference  between  
these  two does not concern  the presence  of buddha  essence  but whether  
the Buddhist  path is realized  through  inferential  reasoning  of the sutra  
approach  or through  direct  experience  of  the Vajrayana  approach.  The  sutra  
approach  can be divided  into the Foundation  Vehicle  and the Mahayana  
Vehicle.  The Mahayana  Vehicle  can then  be divided into “the second  turn ­
ing of the wheel  of Dharma, ” in which  the emphasis  is on the emptiness  
aspect of phenomena,  and “the third  turning  of the wheel of Dharma, ” in

THE VIEW  OF MAHAMUDRA  — 85
which  the emphasis  is on the luminous  clarity  of buddha  essence.  There  is 
no real difference  in the importance  of these  two aspects  of the Mahayana  
presentation  because  both are necessary  for realizing  true reality.  Neither  
approach  is entirely  sufficient  to understand  the Mahayana  because  each  
type  of  presentation  needs  to be augmented  by the other.  For  example,  some  
things  that are presented  in one view  will not be entirely  clear,  while  other  
things  will  not be clear  in the other  approach.
However,  a distinction  can be made  between  these  two phases  of the 
presentation  of Mahayana  in how  they  are employed.  In the second turn ­
ing of the wheel  of Dharma,  we cut through  false projections  by demon ­
strating  emptiness,  which  is taught  in this  vehicle  very  clearly.  But  because  
second  turning  suggests  that emptiness  remains  after these  elaborations  
have been cut through,  it is hard  to understand  from  the second  turning  
how we should  practice  meditation  on emptiness.  It is easier  to practice  
meditation  on the luminous  clarity,  which  is emphasized  more in the 
third  turning.
Question:  Rinpoche,  Kalu Rinpoche  used to speak  about  the nature  of 
mind  as being  empty  and  clear.  I was  wondering  if  you  could  say something  
about  what  “unimpeded ” (Tib.  manggakpa ) is. I never  really  understood  
that.
Rinpoche:  Manggakpa , the unceasing  manifestation  of the mind,  is an 
aspect of luminous  clarity.  If you describe  the mind in terms  of emptiness  
and luminous  clarity,  then  you would  also include  the aspect  of unceasing  
manifestation  that  is unimpeded.  In more  detail,  you can say that  the mind  
is empty  of essence,  naturally  lucid,  and of unceasing  manifestation.  It is 
easiest  to explain  this by going  back  to the emptiness  of the mind.  As you 
know,  the mind  is called  “empty ” because  when  you look for it, it is not to 
be found  and has no substantial  characteristics.  When  we try to embrace  
this concept  of not having  any substantiality,  we develop  a concept  of non­
existence.  However,  if the mind  were  nothing,  then  you would  not be alive. 
The fundamental  meaning  of being  unimpeded  {manggakpa)  is that  while  
there  is nothing  there;  it never  stops.  It never  stops in the sense  that you 
continue  to think,  you continue  to remember,  you continue  to experience.  
What  never  stops?  If  you have  to give it a name, it is the luminous  clarity.  It 
is the unimpeded  or unceasing  quality  of the lucidity  itself.  Therefore,  it is 
usually  called  the “unceasing  manifestation. ”

86 — TEACHINGS  ON THE GANGES  MAHAMUDRA
Question:  Rinpoche,  when  you discussed  the quality  of our mind ’s not 
being  impeded  or obstructed,  I wondered  if it would  be all right  to think  of 
this in terms  of impermanence  rather  than  thinking  of thoughts  or sounds  
as being  followed  and so not allowing  something  else to arise?  Being  imper ­
manent,  they  pass  on and therefore  things  arise.  Is that all right?
Rinpoche:  Actually,  the idea of the unceasing  variety  and display of phe­
nomena  refers  more  to permanence  and continuity  than it does to imper ­
manence.  The connotation  of the term  permanence  is something  that is 
unceasing  and therefore  it is permanent.  What  permanence  refers  to here 
is a quality  of the mind  s nature.  The four cardinal  doctrines  of Buddhism  
are called  the “Four  Dharma  Seals ”49 and these  include  the first seal that all 
composites are  impermanent.  Therefore,  if you accept any  composite  thing  
to be permanent,  that would  be a non-Buddhist  view. But what  is being  
asserted  when  we say that “the nature  of the mind  has a manifestation  that 
is unceasing ” does not indicate  the solidity  of something  that is composite.  
Rather,  because  the mind  s nature  has no true existence,  it does not arise  
and  therefore  does  not  cease;  therefore  it is “unceasing. ” However,  a thought  
itself  is not unceasing  because it does arise and then it ceases.  For example,  
thoughts  are manifestations  of thinking  and the manifestation  of mental  
clarity  is that a particular  thought  does  arise  and it does  cease. So a thought  
would  not be considered  to be unceasing. But the nature  of the mind  from  
which  the thought  arises  is unceasing,  in the sense  that it transcends  the 
four  extremes  and elaborations.  Therefore,  the very  emptiness  of  thoughts  is 
experienced  as being  an unceasing  variety  thoughts.  So, it (unceasing  man ­
ifestation)  refers  more  to permanence  and continuity  and an unchanging  
quality  that nevertheless is totally  devoid  of any kind  of solidity.
Question:  Rinpoche,  I want  to ask about  relaxing  the mind  when  you are 
looking  at the mind.  What  is it exactly  that  relaxes,  and  is relaxing  the mind  
somehow  connected  with  merit  and having  merit  to do that.
Rinpoche:  The opposite  of the type of relaxation  that is being  suggested  
here is a tension  that is based upon  fear with  such thoughts  as, “I must  not 
think,  I will not think.  Oh, I stopped  that thought.  I did not stop  this one, ” 
and so on. That attitude  toward  meditation  turns  the whole  thing  into a 
fight.  What  is meant  by relaxation  is when  thoughts  arise,  we just let them

THE VIEW  OF MAHAMUDRA  — 87
arise  and  we look  at them  directly. It takes  less effort  and creates  a different  
kind  of  environment  for the practice.
The relationship  between  the ability  to relax  in meditation  and the accu ­
mulation  of merit  is that the accumulation  of merit  is helpful  in any aspect  
of meditation,  which  is why it is recommended  that  students  complete  the 
four preliminary  practices  (Tib.  ngondro ) before  receiving  the instructions  
on Mahamudra.  By doing  the first  preliminary,  the prostrations,  we increase  
our faith  and devotion,  which  enhances  our commitment  and involvement  
with  the practice.  By doing  the Vajrasattva  practice,  we remove  some  of the 
tendencies  that would  cause  uncontrolled  thoughts  to afflict  our practice.  
By doing  the mandala  offering  practice,  we gather  the accumulations  that 
make  it more  possible,  or workable,  for us to do the practice  of  Mahamudra.  
By practicing  guru  yoga,  we will receive  the guru  s blessings,  which  brings  
experience  and realization.  All of these  practices,  which  lead to the accu ­
mulations  of  merit  and  wisdom,  are helpful  in many  ways in the practice  of 
Mahamudra.  However,  we should  not mistake  these  words  to mean  that 
someone  who has not completed  these  practices  cannot  do Mahamudra  
practice.  They  can.  It is just that  these  preliminary  practices  are very  helpful.

IO
The Conduct  of Mahamudra
II. The Conduct  of Mahamudra
Now  we are beginning  the second  of the seven  main  sections  of the Ganges  
Mahamudra , which  is an explanation  of the conduct  of Mahamudra.
8b. Abandoning  all physical  actions,  the practitioner  should  rest at 
ease.
Without  any verbal  utterance,  your  speech  becomes  like an echo,  
sound  inseparable  from  emptiness.
Think  of nothing  whatsoever  with  the mind  and look  at the 
dharmas  of the leap.
This  verse  is concerned  with  the conduct  of actual  meditation  practice,  and 
the first line that tells us to abandon  all physical  actions  emphasizes  that it 
is necessary  to sit in a manner  that is physically  still but not tense —that is, 
in a natural  and relaxed  state.  In the narrow  sense,  this can refer  to the pos­
ture often  called  the “seven  dharmas  of  Vairochana. ”50 But whatever  sitting  
posture  is used,  the key point  is to have  a posture  that leads  to naturalness  
and relaxation.  When  we meditate,  we tend to try to tighten  or crank  up 
our awareness  and this causes  our subtle  channels,  muscles,  and so forth  
to tighten  as well.  Because  we tend  to do this in practice,  people  complain,  
“When  I meditate,  I get exhausted.  When  I meditate,  it simply  hurts. ” All 
this happens  from  tightening  up the body  too much,  so in the sitting  pos­
ture we should  be extremely  relaxed so that our muscles,  joints,  and bones  
actually  relax.  Otherwise,  when  we meditate,  we may feel as though  our 
heart  were  being  squeezed  or bound  in some  way. This  point  was explained

90 TEACHINGS  ON THE GANGES  MAHAMUDRA
by Machik  Lapdron  who said, “The essential  point  of physical  posture  is 
that the subtle  channels  and muscles  of  the limbs  are relaxed. ”
Even  though  we may  consciously  relax  our entire  body  while  meditating,  
we may still exert  some  tension  with our eyes and this will cause  them  to 
water  during  practice.  Once  we have  taken  the posture —whether  the seven  
dharmas  of Vairochana  or the fivefold  posture  of meditation —we should  
relax  while  remaining  in that  posture  and not try to maintain  it with  phys ­
ical exertion.  In a similar  way, while  meditating,  some meditators  try to 
control  their  breathing.  It is important  in this practice  of Mahamudra  to 
just  let our  breath  be totally  natural,  breathing  the  way  we always  breathe;  so 
if  the breath  is long,  don ’t try to shorten  it; if it is short,  don ’t try to lengthen  
it. It is important  to put some  attention  into the conscious  relaxation  of  our 
body,  our eyes,  and our breathing  when  we begin  to meditate.
The second  line of this verse is: “Without  any verbal  utterance,  your  
speech  becomes  like an echo,  sound  inseparable  from emptiness. ” This  
line refers  only to meditation  practice  because  in postmeditation  it is fine 
to speak.  But speech during  meditation  is like an echo,  which  means  that 
words  in the past are now  finished,  gone,  and not to be thought about.  So 
speech  in the context  of the formal  practice  of meditation  should  be seen as 
irrelevant,  of no more  consequence  than  an echo.
This  is important  because  the main  cause  of  distracting  thoughts  in med ­
itation  is not the external  images  or sounds  that we see and hear but the 
tendency  we have  to talk to ourselves  internally. This internal  conversation  
is usually  concerned with  what  we have said and done  in the past or with  
what  we will say and do in the future.  It is this internal  speech  that should  
be treated  as an echo —the unity  of sound  and emptiness.  This line thus 
refers  to outside  sounds  that  might  actually  disturb  our meditation  and the 
internal  conversation  that arises  as a distraction  to our meditation.
The main point  in this presentation  of the conduct  of speech  is that 
because  Mahamudra is the path of liberation,  there  is not anything  to be 
chanted  or said orally.  The practice  of speech  that is connected  with  Maha ­
mudra  is basically  silence.  And  connected  with  that is perceiving  sound  or 
relating  to sound  as insubstantial  like an echo  or, we could  say, the unity  of 
sound  and emptiness.  Whether  talking  about  the body,  speech,  or mind,  
the essence  of Mahamudra is that there  is no special  effort  involved.  This 
does not mean  that if you are practicing  Mahamudra,  you must  abandon  
the recitation  of mantras  or that it is forbidden  for a Mahamudra  practi ­
tioner  to recite  mantras  or that if you are a Mahamudra  practitioner  that

THE CONDUCT  OF MAHAMUDRA 91
in postmeditation  you must  stop  working;  rather  it means  that there  is no 
specific  form  of physical  activity  and no specific  form  of verbal  activity  that 
is required  for Mahamudra  practice.
The phrase  “like an echo,  sound  inseparable  from emptiness ” explains  
the approach  we should  have  to speech in Mahamudra.  The reason  why no 
particular  speech  is regarded  as necessary  or more  important  than  any  other  
is that sound  is just one of the expressions  of emptiness.  And,  in that sense,  
sound  is like an echo.  It is not anything  real; it is just  something  that  we are 
experiencing.  So whatever  speech  arises  in our meditation  has that same  
fundamental  quality  or that same  fundamental nature and  therefore  does  
not need  to be especially  cultivated.
The last line refers  to the actual  conduct  of the mind  during  meditation.  
The phrase  “think  of nothing ” could  be misinterpreted  in many  different  
ways.  It does not mean  that we should  literally  try not to think  in medita ­
tion;  rather  it means  that  we should  not fixate  on, or have  an attachment  to, 
whatever  thought  arises.  We should  also not become  attached  to thoughts;  
we don ’t try to prolong  them.  The  key term  used  in this line is ladawa , liter­
ally  “to transverse  the pass ” or it could  be translated  as “leap. ” The  concept  of 
“leap ” distinguishes  the Mahamudra  approach  of  directly  experiencing  our 
mind  from the sutra  approach  of  reaching  a conclusion  by using  logical  rea­
soning.  If we are attempting  to use logical  reasoning  to uncover  the ultimate  
nature  of  phenomena,  there  is, figuratively,  a slow  climb  up the pass  because  
the inferential  process  consists  of thinking  about  all the facts and grad ­
ually  developing  confidence  in their  ultimate  nature.  In the Mahamudra  
approach,  however,  we are “leaping ” past this conceptualization  altogether  
and going  into the direct  experience of the nature  of  our mind.  So, there  is 
no analysis  or labeling  of substantiality,  insubstantiality,  emptiness,  and so 
forth —we are simply  looking  directly  at our mind,  directly  experiencing  it, 
and thereby  directly  meditating  upon  it.
Now, the essence,  or nature,  of mind  is that it is essentially  empty, lumi ­
nous  clarity,  and this is not impeded  by the many  appearances  or variety  of 
manifestations.  While  we are looking  at the essential  emptiness  of  mind,  we 
are not labeling  it or thinking,  “Oh, this is empty  and that is the clarity, ” 
and so forth.  Of course,  it is emptiness,  but we are not labeling  it. Rather  
we just experience  the nature  of the mind  without  attempting  to draw  any 
inferences  from  it.

92- teachings  ON THE GANGES  MAHAMUDRA
III. The Meditation  of Mahamudra
The third of the seven  main topics  of the Ganges  Mahamudra  concerns  
meditation.  The next three  verses  are concerned  with meditation  involved  
in our  conduct  regarding  postmeditation —the meditation  that  we do when  
we are off  the cushion.  The first of these  verses  reads:
9. The body  is without  meaning,  empty  like a bamboo  stalk.
The mind  is like the midst  of space.  It is inconceivable.
Rest relaxed  within  that; do not let it go or force  it to rest,
If mind  has no direction,  it is Mahamudra.
With  this you will attain  unsurpassable  awakening.
The view  of Mahamudra  is the recognition  of the ground,  which  is also 
the ground  of meditation.  The conduct  of Mahamudra  is how to use your  
body,  speech,  and mind  to practice  Dharma  in a way that is based  upon  the 
recognition  of that  view.  This  verse  on meditation  specifically  explains  how 
to familiarize  yourself  with  the view  that has been recognized.  So, medita ­
tion in this context  is basically  further  familiarization  with  the view.  Med ­
itation  here has two aspects:  the preliminary  practices  of meditation  and 
the main  practice of meditation.  Verse  9 of  the text begins a description  of 
the preliminary  practices.
The first  line states,  “The body  is without  meaning,  empty  like a bamboo  
stalk. ” In our everyday  experience,  we think  of ourselves  as, first, having  a 
body  made  of substances  such as flesh and blood  and, second,  as having  a 
mind,  which  is a nonmaterial  entity  that is simply  cognition.  For the dura ­
tion of our life these  two are somewhat  interdependent  and coexist  in the 
same  space.  If we think  about  the nature of our experience, we will easily  
come  to the conclusion  that of these  two, our mind is the more  important  
and significant  entity.  Normally,  however,  we act in a way that regards our 
body  as more  important. Because  of that, most  of  what  we do day to day is 
done  either  directly  or indirectly  to sustain,  cherish,  and protect  our body.  
Although  the body  is really  just an agent  of the mind,  we make the mind  a 
slave  or servant  of the body.  We are constantly  agitated  and constantly  mak­
ing ourselves  miserable  mentally  with such things  as fear that something  
terrible  will happen  to our body,  and so on. From  the long-term  point  of 
view,  this is meaningless  because  the body  is a very temporary  thing.  We

THE CONDUCT  OF MAHAMUDRA  — 93
regard  it as somehow  intrinsically  valuable  but, in fact, the body  has no 
value  whatsoever.
The actual  implementation  of  this understanding  that the body  is empty  
is done  by contemplating  the four  common  preliminaries:  (i) the difficulty  
of acquiring  the freedoms  and resources of our precious  human  existence,  
(2) impermanence  and death,  (3) the result  of actions,  and (4) the problems  
of samsara. 51 One  of  the benefits  of contemplating  these  preliminaries  is that 
our obsession  with our  physical  body  will lessen  and this will then give us 
the space  to actually  practice.
When  we contemplate  these  four common  preliminaries,  or thoughts  
that turn the mind (toward  the Dharma),  the result  is usually  that  we will 
become  inspired  to practice meditation,  which  then  naturally  leads  to dili­
gence  in our  practice.  The  actual  practice  of  meditation  itself  has two  stages:  
Tranquillity  (Skt. shamatha ) and Insight  (Skt. vipashyana).  These  can be 
practiced  with a unified  approach  of Shamatha  and Vipashyana  from the 
beginning  or they  can be practiced  in sequence.
The most  complete  presentation  of  the meditation  would  begin  with  dis­
cussing the physical  posture  of the body  and then how to employ  mental  
techniques  such  as the use of breathing.  In this text, the physical  posture  is 
not discussed  because it is a brief  spiritual  song  and it is assumed  that you 
already  understand  the seven  dharmas  of  Vairochana.
The Ninth  Gyalwa  Karmapa,  Wangchuk  Dorje,  in his Pointing  Out  the 
Dha.rmaka.ya,  makes  the point  that while  we need to have the meditation  
posture  of  the seven  dharmas  ofVairochana,  we must  ensure  that  the way  we 
hold this posture  is relaxed.  Often  when  we fix our mind  on something  or 
when  we concentrate,  we automatically  generate  a state  of physical  tension  
along  with  that.  If  we become  physically  tense  when  practicing  meditation,  
we may  experience some  kind  of  heat or discomfort  or pain.  If these  sensa ­
tions  arise,  they  are not that  important  because  they  are  just  something  that 
comes  about  from  the physical  tension  of our  posture.  Nevertheless,  in order  
to avoid  them,  the Ninth  Karmapa  makes  the following  recommendation:  
“Maintain  a posture that is free of tension,  too much  exertion,  or a feeling  
of being  coiled up; in other  words, make  the posture  relaxed  and comfort ­
able. ” These  words  seem  obvious  right  now, but when  we actually  practice  
meditation  these  instructions  become  very important  and very helpful  in 
developing  a stable  meditation  experience  and in preventing  unnecessary  
impediments  to our meditation.

94 ~ TEACHINGS  ON THE GANGES  MAHAMUDRA
While  we are greatly  attached  to our bodies,  in fact,  our bodies  are with ­
out essence,  which  means  that they are composites  without  true  existence.  
That the body  lacks essence  is conveyed  by the metaphor  in the text of a 
hollow  bamboo  pole.  Then  the second  line says,  “The mind  is like the midst  
of space.  It is inconceivable. ” Here  again  we have the simile  of the mind  as 
being  like space.  If  we look  at the horizon,  we will  see many  things,  but if we 
look  straight  up into the center  of  the sky, we won ’t see anything.  Similarly,  
if  we look  at thoughts,  there  will  be no end to the possible  contents  of those  
thoughts.  But looking  at the mind  is like  looking  at the center  of the sky— 
there  is nothing  to be seen or examined.  In verse 11 of  Aspirational  Prayer  
for  Mahamudra,  the Third  Karmapa,  Rangjung  Dorje,  says:
It does not exist  nor does  it not-exist.
It is not even  seen by the victorious  ones (the buddhas).
It is the basis  of  all samsara  and nirvana.
This  is not a contradiction —it is the Middle  Way.
May  I realize  the dharmata  of the mind  that is beyond  these  
extremes.
Normally,  if we say that  something  exists,  we would  conclude  that  it can­
not be nonexistent.  And  if we say that something  does  not exist,  we would  
conclude  that  it cannot  be existent.  To say that  something  can exist  and not 
exist  at the same time  is a logical  contradiction.  But what  Rangjung  Dorje  
says is that  we cannot  say that the mind ’s nature  exists  and we also cannot  
say that it is nonexistent.  But the fourth  line of Rangjung  Dorje ’s spiritual  
song  says that,  in the case of  mind,  this is not a contradiction.  He then  says, 
“May I realize  the dharmata of the mind  that is beyond  these  extremes. ” 
“Beyond  extremes ” here means  that the mind ’s nature  does not fall into 
either  the extreme  of existence  or the extreme  of nonexistence.  There  is a 
nearly  identical  verse from  the Dzogchen  tradition  composed  by the terton  
Drime  Lingpa,  which  gives these  first three  lines exactly  and then follows  
with “It transcends  utterance  and cannot  be described.  May  this nature  of 
the ground  of Dzogchen  be realized. ” The point  is that in both traditions,  
Mahamudra  and Dzogchen,  the nature  of the mind  is understood  in the 
same  way.
The third  line of verse 9 says that we should  “not let it go or force it to 
rest, ” meaning  that it does not matter  what  is happening  within  our mind.  
When  we look  at the nature  of our mind  and a thought  arises,  that is not a

THE CONDUCT  OF MAHAMUDRA 95
problem.  If  a thought  arises,  then  we look  to see the nature  of that thought  
and in that way we will see the nature of our mind.  If a thought  does not 
arise,  we do not have  to regard that as a problem.  We do not have to try to 
cause  a thought  to arise;  we simply  look  at the nature  of that mind  in the 
absence  of thought.  We do not have to alter the state of our mind  in this 
practice  of meditation.  We do not have to attempt  to force  it to have any 
specific  characteristics.  If we experience  no luminous  clarity,  we do not have  
to go looking  for it. We just look  directly  at what  we experience  and relax  
our mind,  and then  we will see the nature  of our mind  and will be able to 
remain  relaxed  within  that direct  experience of our minds  nature.
This instruction  is extraordinarily useful  and important  because  if we 
lack this instruction,  we are liable to think  that meditation  consists  of 
stopping  thoughts  and that our goal in meditation  is not to think.  This 
is impossible  to do because  even if we succeed  in stopping  the emergence  
of thoughts,  that observance  will simply  become  a thought  itself.  We can 
never  win attempting  to conquer  thoughts.  If, on the other hand,  we take 
the Mahamudra  approach  and simply  look  at the nature  of  whatever  arises  
in our mind,  the thoughts  become  pacified  simply  by seeing  them  as they 
are. To the extent  that we get involved  in fighting  with thoughts  in medi ­
tation,  we become tired  and discouraged  because it is endless.  Simply  look­
ing directly  at the nature  of thoughts  is an effortless process  because  when  
thoughts  are seen as they  are, they  are self-liberated  and pacify  themselves.
According  to all the teachers  in the past, to develop  Mahamudra,  we 
need  to employ  the faculties  of mindfulness  and alertness. In fact,  we need  
a strong  mindfulness  as was taught  by Tashi  Namgyal  in Moonbeams  of 
Mahamudra , in which  he says, “Your  mindfulness  needs  to be sharp  and 
crisp. ” And  in The Way  of the Bodhisattva,  Shantideva  says, “To those  who 
wish  to grasp  hold  of their  mind,  I join my palms  together  in an attitude  of 
reverence  for those  who  exert  themselves  in mindfulness. ”
That  is how  to rest  your  mind.  Then,  within  that  state  of  resting  the mind,  
you practice  Yipashyana  or Insight  meditation.  The difference  between the 
basic  meditation  of  resting  the mind  (Shamatha)  and the practice  of  Insight  
(Vipashyana)  is that Shamatha  is devoid  of Vipashyana  because  when  your  
mind  comes  to rest within  its own nature,  there  is no recognition  of that 
nature.  In order  to develop  Vipashyana,  some  further  instruction  is neces ­
sary  and that is given  in the last two lines  of this verse.
The last two lines  of  verse  9 of our text say, “If mind  has no direction,  it 
is Mahamudra.  With  this you will attain  unsurpassable  awakening. ” The

96 — TEACHINGS  ON THE GANGES  MAHAMUDRA
word  direction  here means  looking  at something.  The definition  of Vipash-  
yana  here is that  you are not looking  at anything,  because  there  is nothing  
to look  at. If you were  looking  for direction  to your  mind,  then  you would  
be looking  for a certain  location  where  the mind  would  be and  you  would  be 
looking  for certain  substantial  characteristics  in that  location,  such  as shape  
and color,  and so forth.  In fact, the nature  of the mind  that is recognized  is 
the absence  of any such  location  or any other  substantial  characteristic.  So 
the nature  of  mind  that  is Mahamudra  is what  you should  familiarize  your ­
self  with. Familiarization  with this nature is the practice  of Mahamudra.  
The Buddha  explained  this in different  ways in different  contexts.  All of 
these  things  are included  in this one understanding  because  this nature  of 
the mind  is beyond  any location  or direction.  The nature  of a mind  that is 
“free of direction ” is the selflessness  of persons  and the selflessness  of phe­
nomena.  It is emptiness.  It is buddha  nature.  If you  familiarize  yourselfwith  
this, then that  will  lead  you to unsurpassable  awakening.
All kinds  of things  constantly  arise  in your  mind.  You become sad, you 
become  fearful,  you become  angry,  you experience  doubt,  you experience  
guilt.  Most  experiences  are unpleasant,  and whatever  they are, you want  
them  to stop.  But you do not know  how  to make  them  stop.  The more  you 
identify  these unpleasant  mental  states  as being  real and solid,  the more  
upset  and the more  angry  you will become,  the more  guilt  you will feel, the 
bigger  grudge  you  will have.  Finally,  if  you maintain  this thinking  strongly  
enough,  you will become  so unhappy  that you will become  physically  ill. 
The  solution  is to see right  through  these  thoughts  because  as long  as you are 
attempting  to flee from  an unpleasant  mental  state,  it will seem  to be very 
powerful  and threatening.  But when  you look right  at it, there  is nothing  
there.  For example,  if you become  intensely  sad and you look right  at the 
sadness,  you find that there  is nothing  there  that  you can really call “sad­
ness. ” Conventionally,  anger  is regarded  as a very  powerful  and dangerous  
emotion,  and often  it is. But that is true  only  so long  as you ignore  looking  
at it. If  you look  right  at your  anger,  there  is nothing  there.  And  this is true 
of any other disturbing  emotion  or unpleasant  mental  state.  If you recog ­
nize its nature,  whatever  it is, it will no longer  harm  you. So this point  is 
important  not  only  for the ultimate  attainment  of  buddhahood  but also for 
the immediate  or short-term  ability  to live happily.

THE CONDUCT  OF MAHAMUDRA  — 97
Questions
Question:  You said that we must  keep  working  on experiencing  the direct  
experience  of mind  both in our meditation  and postmeditation  until  we 
become  used  to it. Is that  cultivation  of  the experience  of  leap  in meditation  
practice  and recognition  in postmeditation  practice  more  about  cultivating  
recognition  in practice?
Rinpoche:  The  distinction  made  between  the experience  of the leap or the 
even-placement  stage  in meditation  and the use of recognition  in postmed ­
itation  is that meditation  or even placement  being  just that, there isn’t a 
great  deal of thoughts  that arise so it is not a practice  concerned with the 
recognition  of thought  but rather  a practice  of simply  experiencing  this 
fundamental  nature.  However,  in postmeditation,  because  we are actively  
engaged  in the world,  thoughts  do arise and therefore  the practice  of rec­
ognition  manifests  more  in postmeditation  when  we attempt  to experience  
what arises  within  a continued  recognition  of this fundamental nature  of 
Mahamudra.  We are trying  to continue  the experience  of this nature  in 
postmeditation,  but it is distinct  from  our  meditation  practice  because  there  
is activity  and thought  in postmeditation.  So these  two aspects  of practice  
assist  each  other:  meditation  enhances  postmeditation  and  postmeditation  
enhances  meditation.
Question:  When  you talk about  the nature  of the mind,  are you also refer ­
ring  to the essence  of the mind?
Translator:  Well,  I have  used  essence  for the Tibetan  ngoivo  and nature  for 
namjen  and  manner  of abiding  for ney  luk, and these  three  terms  can be used  
distinctly  in this context,  but they are really  referring  to the same thing,  
which  we can call the mind ’s “essence,  nature,  or manner  of abiding. ”
Rinpoche:  I have  been  referring  to “the  essence ” or “the nature ” of  the mind,  
which  has also been  called  “the direct ” or “naked ” nature  of the mind.  One  
way  this can be explained  is that,  in our ordinary  (unenlightened)  confused  
state,  we believe  in the apparent  solidity  of  experiences  in our mind  because  
we have  one thought  and then  we jump  to the next  thought  that  is just about  
to begin.  So we end up jumping  from thought  to thought,  experiencing  
this apparent  reality  or solidity  of thoughts  because  of the continuity  of

98 — TEACHINGS  ON THE GANGES  MAHAMUDRA
these  thoughts.  But if  we just rest in the present  moment —that moment  in 
between  what  has just finished  and what  has not yet begun —we can expe ­
rience  that true nature  or essence  of mind.  Thoughts  may arise and cease  
but the mind itself  has not come  from  anywhere,  it isn’t resting  anywhere  
right  now, and it isn’t going  anywhere.  In that  sense,  the nature  of mind  is 
like space,  except  that  it isn’t like empty  space  because,  at the same  time  that 
nothing  is there,  the mind has a cognitive  clarity,  luminous  clarity.  How ­
ever, when  we try to figure  this out  and say, “It really  is like this, ” then we 
run into the problem  that  I already  explained  of  using  words  for things  that 
are indescribable,  which  in turn,  “obscures  this nature. ” On the other  hand,  
if we meditate  and experience  this in our meditation,  we can experience  this 
directly.  This is more  or less what  we mean  when  we talk  about  the essence  
or nature  of the mind.
Question:  You said that we should  embrace  the view of Mahamudra  in 
every  action.  What  about  the boundaries  and rules  given  by society?  Do we 
get rid of them?
Rinpoche:  There  is absolutely  no reason  why  embracing  all actions  with  the 
view  of  Mahamudra  should  cause  them  to be in conflict  with  the customs  of 
the world. In fact,  we should  act in accordance  with  the customs  of society.  
There  are three  aspects to conduct:  what  you do with  your  body,  what  you 
do with  your  speech,  and what  you do with  your  mind.  What  you do with  
your  body  and speech  is simply  to behave  properly,  which  means  to act in 
accordance  with the way of the world.  In this context,  in accordance  with  
the ways of the world  means  to be harmonious  with others,  not to be in 
conflict  with  others, not to be constantly  arguing  and fighting  with  others.  
With  speech,  it means  not to  be impulsive  but to speak  carefully  and with  
consideration  of the effect  our speech  will have  on others.  Now,  sometimes  
we can ’t do this, and we act improperly. The  reason  why  we act improperly  
with  body  and  speech  is that  our  mind  is under  the control  of  the disturbing  
emotions.  If  our mind  is not under  the control  of  disturbing  emotions,  then  
our mind  is in a state  of relaxation  and tranquillity  and improper  actions  of 
body  and speech  will be less likely  to occur.  So the mind  aspect  of conduct  
is to always  experience  the nature  of the mind.  And if we experience  the 
nature  of  the mind,  we will not be overpowered  by attachment,  aggression,  
and ignorance.

THE CONDUCT  OF MAHAMUDRA  — 99
In the beginning,  of course,  this is difficult.  So we can, right  from  the 
start,  cultivate  the attitude,  “I own  my mind.  My mind  doesn ’t own  me and 
run my life. I am going  to control  and train my mind. ” This attitude,  and 
the practice  that  ensues  from this, will bring  about  the pacification  of the 
mind  that  will  cause  the actions  of  our body  and speech  to be in accordance  
with  the needs  of everyone.

II
The Commitments  of Mahamudra
The Ganges  Mahamudra  teachings of Tilopa  are divided  into seven  topics.  
We have already  discussed  the first three topics.  In this chapter,  we will 
discuss  the fourth  topic,  which  is the vows  or commitments  (Skt.  samaya ) 
of Mahamudra.
Samaya,  or Vajrayana  commitments,  refers to a pledge  or promise  or 
commitment —something  you undertake.  The way samaya  is explained  in 
the tantras  and in traditional  texts makes  it sound  extremely  dangerous,  
like some  kind  of  horrific  control, a complete  lack  of  personal  freedom,  and 
that if you make  any attempt  to assert  personal  freedom,  you will be cast 
immediately  into the depths  of the lowest  hell. It is explained  this way for 
a reason,  which  is that in order  to accomplish  anything,  you need  to main ­
tain  a certain  consistent  direction  and diligence.  This  is obvious  and true of 
anything  that we attempt to  do. It is not true that if you attempt  to assert  
personal  freedom  or if  you impair  samaya,  you immediately  throw  yourself  
into the depths  of the lowest  hell, but it is true that it is very  important  to 
keep  samaya.
IV. The Commitments  of Mahamudra
io. Those  who  follow  tantra  and the vehicle  of  the paramitas,
The  Vinaya,  the sutras, and the various teachings  of the Buddha  with  
an attachment  for their  individual  textual  traditions  and their  
individual  philosophy
Will  not come  to see luminous  Mahamudra,
Because  the seeing  of that  luminosity  is obscured  by their  intention  
and attitude.

IOZ TEACHINGS  ON THE GANGES  MAHAMUDRA
Verse  io is an explanation  of what  the practice  of  Mahamudra  isn’t, in other  
words,  how attachment  to a particular  conceptual  view will not lead to 
Mahamudra.  This  is true regardless  of the sophistication  of the view.
On the face of it, this verse  seems  a little  odd. It seems  that  Tilopa  is say­
ing that none  of these  aspects  of Buddhism  are of much  use. But he is not 
saying  that.  He is not  saying  that  these  various  traditions,  vehicles,  or aspects  
of training  are useless.  Rather  he is pointing  out that since  these  different  
practices  are all ultimately  methods  for realizing Mahamudra,  if they are 
practiced  in the  absence  of that view,  they  will not lead to that realization  
that is their  true  purpose.
For example,  he first mentions  that those  who follow  the tantra,  or 
secret  Mantrayana,  or Vajrayana  will obscure Mahamudra.  He means  that 
if you attempt  to practice  the Vajrayana  without  the view  of Mahamudra  
or without  the intention  of realizing  Mahamudra,  then no matter  how 
much  you practice,  it will not lead you to the realization  of Mahamudra.  
The same  is true  of  the practice  of the paramitas,  or the perfections.  If you 
practice  the six perfections,  of course,  this will lead to the realization  of 
Mahamudra,  provided  that  the understanding  of  Mahamudra  is there  from  
the beginning.  But if you simply  practice  the perfections  in the absence  of 
the Mahamudra  view,  then  you will not realize  it. You cannot  simply  hope  
that by practicing  something  other  than Mahamudra  that you will realize  
Mahamudra,  and this is true of every  aspect  of Dharma  because  all these  
various  aspects  of  the Buddhist  tradition  are methods  for the realization  of 
Mahamudra.  But they  cannot  be effective  unless  the view  of  Mahamudra  is 
there  from  the beginning.
The main  point  here is that whatever  you practice —the Vajrayana,  the 
paramitas,  the Vinaya— it should  be combined  with  the practice  of Maha ­
mudra.  The connection  between  this and the topic  of samaya  is that ulti­
mately the true samaya  is the commitment  to recognize  the mind  s nature  
through  transcending  or pacifying  the agitation  of thoughts.
ii. The conceptualized  maintenance  of  vows  actually  causes  you to 
impair  the meaning  of samaya.
Without  mental  activity  or direction,  be free of all intentionality.
Thoughts  are self-arisen  and self-pacified  like designs  on the surface  
of water.
If  you do not pass beyond  the meaning  that is not abiding  and not 
conceptualizing  or focusing,

THE COMMITMENTS  OF MAHAMUDRA 103
Then  through  not passing  beyond  that,  you do not transgress  samaya.
This  is the torch  that dispels  all obscurity  or darkness.
The Sanskrit  word samaya  was translated  by Tibetan  translators  as 
damzik.  The first  syllable,  dam,  means  “a promise,  a commitment,  an under ­
taking, ” such  as the acknowledgment  “I will do such  and such. ” The second  
syllable,  zik, which  is often  taken  to mean  “word, ” here actually  means  “a 
joint,  border,  or boundary, ” like a joint in  a bamboo  stalk,  which  is called  
a zik. What  zik means  in this context  is “that which  is not to be passed  
beyond ”—in other  words, it is a limit  or a boundary.
Sometimes  samaya  is misunderstood  by students  as a vow  that  you make  
at an empowerment.  For example,  students  often  think  that they  are under  
the constraint  of  a samaya  or vow  to recite  a certain  number  of mantras  each  
day,  which  is associated  with  an empowerment  they  may  have  received,  and 
that if they miss a day, then their samaya  will be broken  and something  
terrible  will happen  to them.  Of  course,  it is good  if you commit  yourself  
to doing  a certain  Dharma  practice,  but not doing  the practice  is not what  
is meant  by breaking  samaya.  Some  students  may  also think  that  samaya  is 
something  that is terribly  delicate and dangerous  and that if you make  the 
slightest  mistake  with  regard  to your  commitments,  you will plunge head ­
long  into the lower  realms. This is not exactly  true. However, if  you believe  
that samaya  is unimportant  and can be ignored,  this is absolutely  not true 
either.  What  you need  in this life is to be liberated,  and liberation  can come  
only from  practice,  and practice  can come  only from diligence  and exer­
tion. So a personal  commitment  to practice  is essential,  and if  you have  the 
thought,  “I will do this much  practice  and follow  the instructions  or com­
mands  of  my root  guru, ” it is very  important.  If these  commitments  are made  
and you are committed  to practice  on the path,  then the practice  will pro­
duce  a great  result,  which  is eventual  liberation.  And  if  you don ’t fulfill  your  
commitment,  then  obviously  having  promised  that  you  would  do a practice  
is utterly  meaningless.  You must  understand  that a failure  to fulfill  these  
commitments  immediately  places  you in the category  of a samaya  breaker,  
but you  will  not be plunged  headlong  into the lower  realms.  Nevertheless,  it 
is important  to fulfill  or follow  up on the commitments  made  to practice.
The first line of verse 11 discusses  the samaya  specific  to Mahamudra:  
“The conceptualized  maintenance  of vows actually  causes  you to impair  
the meaning  of samaya. ” On the conventional  level, it is obviously  neces ­
sary to behave  properly  and not allow  ourselves  to become  involved  with

104 TEACHINGS  ON THE GANGES  MAHAMUDRA
conduct  that  is harmful  or unvirtuous  and  to try to always  engage  in positive  
actions.  Having  this level  of  mindfulness  and  attentiveness  is, of  course,  also 
important.  But, at the same  time,  thinking,  “I am keeping  these  rules.  I am 
doing  this. I will not do that, ” and so forth  can become  a fixation  upon  that 
concept,  which  will obstruct  our Shamatha  of Mahamudra  because  it is a 
fiercely  held concept.  So in this sense,  if there  is a conceptual  fixation  on, 
or pride  in, our moral  choices,  it is contradictory  to the samaya  of ultimate  
truth,  which  is the samaya  of Mahamudra.
The samaya  of Mahamudra  is not a matter  of not doing  something;  this 
samaya  is not kept by thinking,  “I will do this, and I will not do that. ” 
Rather  this samaya  is described in the next line: “Without  mental  activity  
or direction. ” When  the verse says, “without  mental  direction, ” it means  
without  any  conceptual  fixation  on solidity  or nonsolidity,  on existence  or 
the absence  of existence.  The samaya  of  Mahamudra  fosters the experience  
of  the mind  s nature  by allowing  us to experience  it rather  than  by attempt ­
ing to create  or fabricate  a conceptualized  experience.
While  we are practicing  this way in our meditation,  thoughts  will, of 
course,  arise; dealing  with these thoughts  is explained  in the third  line:  
“Thoughts  are self-arisen  and self-pacified  like designs  on the surface  of 
water. ” This  means that thoughts  that  seem  to us to just arise  of themselves  
and  disappear  in the same  way  do not need  to be chased  out or intentionally  
gotten  rid of. The image  given  is that  of  drawing  a design  with  a stick  in calm  
water, which  will surely  vanish,  perhaps  even  before the design  is finished.  
Because  thoughts  are nothing  other  than the unimpeded  and unceasing  
display  of the mind,  there  is no need  to try to eliminate  them  and there  is 
no need to view them  as obstacles.  So, thoughts  are not to be considered  
something  that we need to intentionally  abandon.
The last lines of verse  11, “If you do not pass beyond the meaning  that is 
not abiding  and not conceptualizing  or focusing, then  through  not passing  
beyond  that, you do not transgress  samaya. ” These  lines refer to how to 
practice  within  the samaya  of Mahamudra.  Generally,  we think  that med ­
itation  consists  of the mind staying  still. Although  we can experience  this 
stillness,  nevertheless,  the mind  is not actually  at rest because  the mind  does  
not abide  anywhere  and the mind  itself  isn’t a substantial  thing  that can 
abide  or rest. If there  is no abider,  there  cannot be any abiding.  If we have  
had an experience of the mind abiding  somewhere,  then that idea  was not 
obtained  from  direct  experience  of looking  at the mind and was therefore  
a conceptual  thought.

THE COMMITMENTS  OF MAHAMUDRA 105
Meditation  here simply  refers  to looking  directly  at the nature  of our 
mind  and the nature  of  whatever  arises  in our mind.  So we are not looking  
in a certain  place to rest our mind.  There  is no place  to rest our mind  while  
looking  at the nature  of mind.  We are not focusing  on anything  in particu ­
lar because  the mind  is empty.  The way  we keep  samaya,  the way  we look  at 
our  minds  nature,  is by being  free of  the idea  of  aplace  or focus  of  the mind.
There  are three  main  points  in this  verse.  The  first  is that  even  though  the 
nature of our mind  is beyond location,  nevertheless  it can be experienced.  
Looking  at the nature  of mind  is not a state  of  vacant  stupidity.  There  is an 
actual  clarity  and  an actual  experience  of mind.  It is not a state  of distraction.  
Distraction  and  mental  blankness  are different  things  than  the recognition  
of the mind.  Recognition  of the mind  is not stupidity  or distraction.  If we 
remain  in that  direct  looking  at our mind ’s nature  without  becoming  blank  
or distracted,  we will then remain  within  true  samaya  because  this samaya  
is experiencing  our mind ’s nature.  In fact, by resting  in the recognition  of 
our mind ’s nature,  we are doing  more  than  simply  keeping  samaya  because  
as the verse  says, “This is the torch  that dispels  all obscurity  or darkness. ” 
It is like lighting  a torch  that in an instant  dispels  the obsority  or darkness  
of innumerable  eons.  So we are removing  all our suffering  that comes  from  
ignorance. The point  of  all of this is that  we need  to keep  samaya  by resting  
in the recognition  of our mind ’s nature.
The second  point  is we look at mind  without  a reference  (Tib. mikpa  
mepa ), which  means  that  in the practice  of  Mahamudra  there  is no object  or 
objective  reference  to the meditation  and  there  is no truly  existent  cognition  
that  could  perceive  such  an object,  so there  is no reference  point  whatsoever.
The third  point  in looking  at mind  is “not departing  from  the meaning. ” 
We might  think  that because  the mind  is not anywhere  and without any 
reference  point,  it must  just be a voidness.  This, however,  is not true. If we 
recognize  the mind ’s nature,  then  “not passing  beyond  that ” means  that  we 
do not stray  from  the recognition  of  the mind ’s nature.  This  also  means  that 
although  we are not intentionally  attempting  to get rid of  thoughts,  we don ’t 
do this by letting  our thoughts  run wild;  rather  we maintain  awareness  of 
the mind ’s nature.
These  three  points  are the samayas  that  we should  achieve  and the previ ­
ous vows  about  not trying  to get rid of thoughts  and so forth  are the sama ­
yas that we should  not follow.  So, if these  points  are kept,  then  we will be 
keeping  the pure  and  genuine  samaya  without  violation.

II
The Benefits  of Practicing  Mahamudra
V. The Benefits  of Practicing  Mahamudra
Now  we are beginning  the fifth main  topic  of the seven  topics  of the Gan­
ges Mahamudra , which  is an explanation  of the benefits  of practicing  
Mahamudra.
12. If free of all intention  you do not abide  in extremes,
You  will see without  exception  the meaning  of all the Buddhas  
teachings  from  all the sections of the Buddhas  Dharma.
The Uttaratantra  and  some  of the tantras  describe  being  “free  ofextremes ” 
as meaning  that there  is nothing  we have to remove  and nothing  we have  
to add. By looking  at the genuine  or perfect  Dharma,  we will become  gen­
uinely  or perfectly  enlightened.  On a conventional  level of reality,  we can 
say that there  are a great  number  of negative  behaviors  to be removed  and  
positive  behaviors  to be added.  But this  verse  says that  there  is nothing  to be 
removed  and nothing  to be added  to the nature  of  the mind.  In other  words,  
the correct  way to experience  the nature  of mind  is to make  no attempt  to 
conceptualize  it as being  existent  or nonexistent.  If we remain  without  an 
investment  in this conceptual  view,  then  we will  see the essence  of all dhar-  
mas of the three  baskets.  By simply  remaining  in this  state,  we will not fall 
into the extreme  of  existence  or the extreme  of  nonexistence,  which  we can 
call “pure  samaya. ”
The  Three  Baskets  are all the teachings  given  by the Buddha:  the Vinaya-  
pitaka  (“the basket  of discipline ”), which  presents  the superior  training  in 
discipline;  the Sutra-pitaka  (“the basket  of  discourses ”), which  presents  the

108 — TEACHINGS  ON THE GANGES  MAHAMUDRA
training  in samadhi  (meditative  absorption);  and the Abhidharma-pitaka  
(“the basket  of  abhidharma ”), which  presents  how  to train  in knowledge  or 
understanding.  Generally  speaking,  it is said that the Buddha  gave twenty-  
one  thousand  teachings  on discipline  connected  with  the  Vinaya  as a remedy  
for the disturbing  emotion  of attachment,  twenty-one  thousand  teachings  
on meditation  presented  in the sutras  as a remedy  for aggression,  twenty-one  
thousand  teachings  of  the  Abhidharma  as a remedy  for mental  dullness,  and 
twenty-one  thousand  teachings  aimed  at dealing  with  all three  disturbing  
emotions  at once,  which  probably  refers  to the tantras.
Thus,  it is said that there  are eighty-four  thousand  different  teachings  
given  by the Buddha.  Obviously,  we cannot  learn all of these  eighty-four  
thousand  teachings.  However, the way that Dharma  functions  is that fully  
understanding  any one aspect  of the Dharma  teachings  leads to a complete  
understanding  of the meaning  of all of these  teachings.  In this  verse,  it says 
that if there  is a general  understanding  of the nature  of the mind  that tran­
scends  the extremes  of  existence  and nonexistence,  then  one  will  experience  
the essence  of  all the teachings  of  the Buddha.
13. If you rest in this,  you will be liberated  from  the prison  of 
samsara.
If  you rest evenly  within  this, all of  your  wrongdoing  and 
obscurations  will be burned.
For these  reasons,  this is called  the torch  of the doctrine.
Normally,  whatever  happens  to us—whether  we are suffering  or we 
are happy  or even if we are residing  in a lower  or a higher  realm— all this 
occurs  within  samsara.  Regardless  of how pleasant  or unpleasant  it may 
be, samsaras  fundamental  nature  is the same;  it is like being  in a prison  
from which  we cannot  escape.  Because  our minds  are driven  by thought  
and because  we have so many  shackles  on our thoughts,  we believe  that 
something  that does not exist actually  does exist and that something  that 
exists  does  not actually  exist. 52 This  mistaken  belief  prevents  us from  letting  
go of our obscurations,  which  keeps  us from  developing  our good  qualities.  
Of  course,  within  this  prison  of  samsara,  we may  be able  to perform  virtuous  
actions  that will certainly  lead to states  of happiness,  but doing  virtuous  
actions  cannot  by itself  lead to liberation.  Only  the realization  of Maha-  
mudra  can lead to liberation.  This means  that any virtuous  action  that we 
perform  should  be embraced  by this  view  of  Mahamudra.  If  we practice  the

THE BENEFITS  OF PRACTICING  MAHAMUDRA  — 109
creation  stage  of  tantric  meditation  and  join  that  practice  with  Mahamudra,  
it will  become  the cause  for our  liberation.  Also,  if we engage  in the slightest  
action  of generosity  and embrace  that act with  the view  of Mahamudra,  it 
too will become  a cause  for our liberation.  Any  practice  of any of the six 
perfections 53 combined  with the view  of Mahamudra  becomes  a cause  for 
liberation.  In sum,  any  action  that  is free  of  conceptualizing  the three  circles  
of  action  (the act, the person  performing  it, and the recipient)  will  enable  us 
to escape  from  the jail of samsara  and obtain  liberation.
The first  line of the thirteenth  verse  deals  with  the removal  of the effect,  
which  is samsara,  and the following  line deals  with  the removal  of the cause  
of samsara,  which  is doing  negative  activities.  These  lines say that if we 
realize  the view  of Mahamudra,  practice  this meditation,  and abide  within  
this conduct  by observing  these  samayas,  then  we will  be liberated  from  the 
cyclic  existence  of samsara.
The second line uses the metaphor  of fire to describe  Mahamudra.  Just 
as a fire can burn up an entire  forest,  Mahamudra  can burn away all of 
the wrongdoing  and obscurations  that we have accrued  from beginning-  
less time.  Because  of this, it is the supreme  form  of purification.  Generally  
speaking,  of course,  if a negative  action  such as one of the ten unvirtuous  
actions  or the more  serious  five actions  of  immediate  result  is committed, 54 
and this action  is not admitted  to or confessed, it will  lead to suffering  and 
obstacles.  But Mahamudra  practice  itself  can burn  through  the imprints  or 
traces  of  these  actions. 55 The root  of all negative  behavior  is the obscuration  
of  the disturbing  emotions  and the obscuration  to our wisdom.  When  our 
mind  is totally  overpowered  by strong  disturbing  emotions,  we cannot  rest 
in meditation  or engage  in active  virtue.  Also,  the cognitive  obscuration  
of not perceiving  things  as they actually  are is the disturbing  emotion  of 
ignorance,  and this is also a powerful  obstacle  for us. When  we are influ ­
enced  by a strong  incorrect  belief,  it obstructs  our practice  of meditation.  
On the other  hand,  if we rest in Mahamudra,  we can burn through  these  
obscurations.
The third  line mentions  that “the torch  of the doctrine ” eliminates  these  
obscurations,  which  means  that Mahamudra  illuminates  or makes  all the 
other  aspects  of the Dharma  effective.  This is not to say that other  prac ­
tices are not necessary— if only Mahamudra  were of any value,  then the 
other  eighty-four  thousand  types  of teachings  given  by the Buddha  would  
be meaningless.  In fact,  in the practice  of  Mahamudra,  we begin  with  many  
other  kinds  of  practice, such  as the four  common  and the four  uncommon

no — TEACHINGS  ON THE GANGES  MAHAMUDRA
preliminaries,  various  forms  of  guru  yoga,  yidam  practice,  and so forth.  The 
point  of  this  verse  is not that  these  practices  are worthless; rather  they  must  
be embraced  by the view  of Mahamudra  in order  to work.  For example,  if 
we do refuge  practice  or the preliminary  prostration  practice  within  the 
view of Mahamudra,  it becomes  a very  powerful  method  for the removal  
of the traces  of wrongdoing  and obscurations.  This is also true for doing  
the second  preliminary  practice  of Vajrasattva  practice  and so on. Because  
Mahamudra  makes  the teachings  of the Buddha  effective,  it is called  “the 
torch  of the doctrine. ”
Sometimes  people  who have been practicing  for some time say that 
although  they  have  done  such  and such  practices, they  have  achieved  noth ­
ing by doing  them —the practices  seem  to be totally  ineffective.  The defect  
in their  practice  is the absence  of  the view  or understanding  of Mahamudra.  
So, if we practice  without  this understanding,  we will not achieve  any  pos­
itive  qualities of the practice.

13
The Defects  of Not Practicing  
Mahamudra
VI. The Defects  of Not Practicing  Mahamudra
Now  we are beginning  the sixth  of the seven  main sections  of the Ganges  
Mahamudra,  which  is an explanation  of  the  problems  or defects  of  not  prac­
ticing  Mahamudra.
14. Foolish  people  who  have  no interest  in this will only  be 
continually  carried  off  by the river  of samsara.
Those  foolish  people  experiencing  intolerable  sufferings  in lower  
states of existence  are worthy  of compassion.
The first  line of the fourteenth  verse,  which  begins  “Foolish  people  who 
have no interest  in this, ” means  that whatever else we do—no matter  how  
virtuous  it is—if we are without  the experience  of  the mind  s nature,  we will 
not attain  liberation.  Regardless  of  how  pleasant  the circumstances  that  we 
may experience  as a result  of having  engaged  in virtuous  actions, we have  
not transcended  the cycle  of samsara  and therefore  will be continually  car­
ried off  by the river  of samsara.  We will be thrown  about  from  one type of 
existence  to another  without  any control  because the basic  root of  samsara  
has not been  cut. Persons  who are not interested  in realizing  the nature  of 
the mind  are referred  to as “fools ” because  they  lack  full  knowledge  (prajna ).
In the sutras,  the Prajnaparamita  is referred  to as “the mother  who  gives  
birth  to the four  types  of superior  beings, ” which  are shravakas  and  pratyeka-  
buddhas  (the  two  types  of  arhats),  bodhisattvas,  and  buddhas.  Thus  prajna  is

IIZ — TEACHINGS  ON THE GANGES  MAHAMUDRA
required  not  only  for the realization  of  a buddha  but  also  for the partial  real­
ization  of  an arhat,  who  realizes  the selflessness  or egolessness  of  self,  and for 
the realization  of  a bodhisattva,  who  realizes  the selflessness  of  phenomena  
connected  with the Middle  Way school. 56 This same  fundamental  prajna,  
which  is the recognition  to some  extent  of the absolute  nature  of things,  
must  be present.  Therefore  prajna  itself  is a deciding  factor  in liberation.  
And  this is true  whether  it is a Foundation  school  realization, a Mahayana  
school  realization,  or even  the practice  of Mahamudra.
In spite  of the fact that  Mahamudra  is extremely  easy  and convenient  to 
practice  and vastly  beneficial,  people  generally  have no interest  in it. Even  
though  it is a way to effectively  accomplish  all positive  qualities  and free 
oneself  from all  defects,  people  can be extremely  foolish,  having  no interest  
in something  that is exactly  what  they need.  The problem  with not being  
interested  in recognizing  the nature  of our mind  is that we will instead  be 
continually  carried  off  by samsara.
Another  problem  with being  carried  off  by samsara  is that we continue  
to experience  uncontrolled  rebirth.  We might  be reborn  in the lower  realms  
of existence  as an animal,  a hungry  ghost,  or a hell being.  And  regardless  of 
where  we are reborn,  a great  deal  of  what  happens  to us in samsara  is pretty  
miserable.  As a result,  we will  continue  to experience  unpredictable  rebirth,  
and will undergo  a great  deal of intolerable  mental  and physical  suffering  
of all kinds,  with unpleasant  circumstances  affecting  us, our friends,  and 
our family.  All sorts  of things  will continue  to happen  to us as long  as we 
reject  this single  point  of allowing  what  arises  in our mind  to be pacified.  
As long  as we reject the technique  of Mahamudra,  our suffering  will never  
end.  In the last  line,  Tilopa  expresses  great  and  sincere  compassion  for those  
who,  having  no wish  to suffer,  reject  the only  thing  that  can really  end their  
suffering.
We have  now  completed  the sixth  section,  which  deals  with the defects  
of  not  practicing  Mahamudra.  The seventh  and final  section,  which  is quite  
long  and detailed,  concerns  how  to practice  Mahamudra.
Questions
Question:  In terms  of letting  go of thoughts,  it seems  that emotional  situ­
ations create  situations  where  the thoughts  just keep coming  up again  and 
again.

THE DEFECTS  OF NOT PRACTICING  MAHAMUDRA 113
Rinpoche:  Sometimes  there  is a strong  disturbing  emotion  or a strong  and 
persistent  thought  that  arises.  When  we fail to recognize  the root of it— 
where  it starts  and comes  from —then  we become  very  confused.  The image  
we can use here is that  of a tree.  When  a tree and its branches  start  to grow,  
its branches  start  to cover  the trunk  so much  that  you cannot  see the trunk;  
all you  can see are the branches  of the tree.  If  the branches  fall  off or die, then  
you start  to see the trunk  more  and more  clearly  whether  you recognize  the 
root of it or not. In this analogy,  if you want  to know  where  this thought,  
sensation,  or emotion  is coming  from,  you must  meditate  on whatever the 
thought  is, whatever  form  it takes,  and then look  directly  at its nature  and 
this will cause  it to be self-pacified.  In other  words,  if you look  directly  at 
the trunk  of a thought,  it will vanish  or subside.

H
How  to Practice  the Preliminaries
VII. The Manner  of Practicing  Mahamudra
Of  the seven  topics  of the Ganges  Mahamudra,  we are now  concerned  with  
the last one,  which  is how  to practice.  We have  studied  the nature  of  Maha ­
mudra;  the realization  of  which  has many  benefits  and the absence  of which  
has many  defects.  We  have  also  studied  the view,  meditation,  and  conduct  of 
Mahamudra.  But simply  knowing  these  things  is of  no benefit  to us because  
it is necessary  to put Mahamudra  into practice.  To put Mahamudra  into 
practice,  we have to understand  this practice.  This is why this section  is so 
extensive.  If it is properly  practiced,  we will develop  an extraordinary  view  
and realization;  if it is not properly  practiced,  then  we will not. There  are 
two aspects  to this practice:  how to practice  the preliminaries  and how to 
practice  the main  body  of  Mahamudra.  The first  section  on how  to practice  
the preliminaries  has four  parts.
Relying  on a Guru
15. Wishing  to attain  liberation  from  intolerable  suffering,  rely upon  
a wise  guru.
When  the gurus  blessings  enter  your  heart,  your  mind  will be 
liberated.
These  phenomena  of  samsara  are pointless  and are the causes  of 
suffering.
And  since  all of these  things  we have  been  doing  are pointless,  look  
at that  which  is meaningful.

1X6 — TEACHINGS  ON THE GANGES  MAHAMUDRA
By properly  relying  on a teacher,  we can develop  a stable  renunciation  of 
samsara.  The correct  reliance  on a teacher  and  the subsequent  generation  of 
a stable  renunciation  of  samsara  allows  us to enter  the door  of Mahamudra.  
The first thing  required  at the beginning  of our practice  is to properly  rely 
on a teacher.  This  is discussed  in the first two lines  of  verse  15.
Our  life is that  we are in samsara,  which  sometimes  is pleasant  and  some ­
times  extremely  unpleasant.  When  it is unpleasant  and  we are suffering,  we 
cannot  tolerate  this suffering.  When  we are happy,  everything  seems  good.  
This is good  except  that the happiness  never  lasts; the circumstances  that 
produced  the happiness  will change,  and because  of this contrast  to our 
happiness,  the happiness  itself  becomes  a cause  of  more  suffering  for us. This  
type of suffering  is called  “the suffering  of change. ” Furthermore,  the very 
essence  of every  situation  in samsara  is unstable  and in constant  change,  
and this type of suffering  is called  “all-pervasive  suffering. ” The basis for 
Buddhist  practice  must  therefore  begin  with  the recognition  that  the nature  
of  samsara  is suffering.  This  recognition  inspires  us with  a genuine  desire  to 
be liberated  from  samsara.
There  are two possible  motivations  we might  have for practicing.  One  
might  be the desire  for short-term  happiness  and protection,  which  refers  
to the desire  to accomplish  states  of  temporary  happiness  by doing  virtuous  
actions.  Although  this is a good  intention,  this motivation  is not based  on a 
complete  realization  of  the pervasiveness  of  suffering.  We should  begin  with  
the attitude  of wishing  for a final  and  complete  liberation  from  samsara  alto­
gether.  This means  recognizing  that the basic  nature  of  samsara  is ordinary  
suffering, the suffering  of  change,  and all-pervasive  suffering.  This  renunci ­
ation  itself  is inspired  by relying  on a proper  guru.
We might  ask why  it is necessary  to rely on a guru.  The reason  for relying  
on a guru is that accomplishing  ultimate  liberation  is quite  different  from  
engaging  in mundane activities.  When  we attempt to  learn  something  on 
the conventional level,  we need  a teacher.  In other  ordinary  situations,  we 
may need only a book  or video.  However,  when  practicing  Mahamudra,  
which  in its very  nature  transcends  the conceptual  mind,  the only  resource  
that is available  to us in practicing  Mahamudra  is an experienced  guru  
who  has practiced  Mahamudra  himself  or herself  and  who  has received  the 
transmission  of Mahamudra  from  a lineage.  Experience  here  means  that  the 
guru  has to have  had an actual  experience  of dharmata —the true nature  of 
phenomena —that  transcends  the intellect  and the teacher  has to be able to 
point  this out to the student.

HOW  TO PRACTICE  THE PRELIMINARIES  — 117
The  first  line  says,  “rely upon  a wise  guru. ” “Wise ” here  could  mean  either  
learned  in words  or learned  in the meaning.  In this case, a guru who is 
merely  learned  in the words  of Mahamudra  will not be of much  benefit.  
We need  a teacher  who  is experienced  in the meaning,  which  means  having  
actual  experience  of Mahamudra.  An example  of this is found  in the biog­
raphy  of Naropa.  Naropa,  who was already  a great  scholar  and pandita  at 
Nalanda  University, was sitting  outside  the temple  reading  and studying.  
He was approached by a wisdom  dakini  in the form  of an old woman  who 
asked  him if he understood  the meaning  or merely  the words of the teach ­
ings.  When  Naropa  said  he understood  the words,  she was  joyous;  when  he 
said that he also understood  the meaning,  she became  very  angry  and said 
that he needed  to take Tilopa  as a guru  because  Tilopa  indeed  understood  
the meaning.
The second  line of this verse  says, “When  the guru  s blessings  enter  your  
heart,  your  mind  will  be liberated.  ” A successful  practice  of the path  depends  
upon  receiving  the instructions  and  practicing  under  the guidance  of  a wise 
guru.  Exactly  how does this benefit  of a successful  practice  occur?  All of 
the benefits  of working  with  an authentic  guru  are included  in the concept  
of blessings.  The word  blessing  normally  conveys  the idea of some  kind of 
power  or energy  that is transmitted  to us by our teacher. The  Tibetan  word  
for blessing  is jinlap , and the first syllable,  jin, is the past tense  of the verb  
“to give. ” It means  that  which  has been  given  or transmitted  to you by your  
teacher.  The second  syllable,  lap, means  “waves. ” Waves  are a metaphor  for 
the actual  power  or energy  of the teacher  s blessing  that engulfs  you. How  
is this blessing  transmitted?  It really  consists  of  two related  processes,  both  
of  which  can be called  “blessing. ”
The first of these  is the natural  blessing,  or the automatic  result  of some ­
one ’s faith and devotion.  If we have strong  faith and devotion,  somehow  
just  through  having  them,  we will  experience  change,  especially  a change  in 
our mind.  And  the mind  can possibly  change quite  radically.  For example,  
if  someone  whose  mind  has no stability  or tranquillity  were  to develop  this 
kind  of faith  and devotion,  they  would  develop  a quality  of tranquillity  at 
the same  time.  If someone  already  has some  degree  of tranquillity,  with  an 
increase  of  devotion,  that  tranquillity  will increase  accordingly.  This  is also 
true  of  mental  clarity.  With  an increase  in devotion,  there  will  be an increase  
in luminous  clarity.  This natural  result  of devotion  is true of any kind  of 
meditation  experience  or realization.
The other  aspect  of blessing  is the result  of hearing  the teachings  of

ii8 TEACHINGS  ON THE GANGES  MAHAMUDRA
the guru.  When  you hear the guru ’s teachings,  you are benefited  by them  
directly.  Through  that  instruction,  you come  to recognize  your  own  nature.  
You  come  to understand  Dharma  and,  therefore,  you develop  confidence  in 
it. That  confidence  in the Dharma  automatically  leads  to diligence, which  
leads  to meditation,  which,  if it was not there  before,  will be there,  and if it 
was there  before, meditation  will increase. So in a sense,  this whole  process  
is the blessing  of the guru ’s speech;  it takes  place through the  power  of the 
guru ’s speech.  So the guru ’s speech  can also be called  a blessing.
Normally,  our mind  is so bound  up with  concepts  of  existence  and non­
existence  that we do not allow  ourselves  to become  liberated.  The process  
that we usually  go through  is one of constantly  developing  fixations  and 
attachments  to external  things  and  situations,  and this constantly  increases  
our disturbing  emotions.  If, on the other  hand,  we develop  both stable  
renunciation  and  devotion  for an authentic  root  guru,  then  these  conditions  
free our mind from this net of conceptuality  that impedes  our liberation.  
When  the text  says,  “When  the guru ’s blessings  enter  your  heart,  your  mind  
will  become  liberated, ” it means  that  the nature  of  your  mind  will  manifest.  
Saraha  made  the famous  statement:  “Homage  to the mind  that is like a 
wish-fulfilling  jewel, ” which  means  that the mind  is intrinsically  free of 
defects  and possesses  all possible  qualities  in completeness  and abundance.  
In other  words,  the potential  to benefit  not only  yourself  but all other  beings  
is innately  present  in your mind  already.  For example,  all of the qualities  
and activities  of Buddha  Shakyamuni —starting  from his attainment  of 
unsurpassable  awakening,  to his turning  of the wheel  of Dharma and  his 
subsequent  helping  of innumerable  beings  in various  states  of  liberation — 
came  from  the qualities  that  were  always  innate  within  his mind and  that 
manifested  when  he attained  buddhahood.  Buddha  Shakyamuni  is not the 
only one who possesses  these  qualities.  We all possess  these  qualities.  The 
difference  between  a buddha  and  ourselves  is that  our qualities  are dormant  
because  they are obscured  by what the mahasiddhas  of our lineage  have  
called  “the cocoon  of  conceptuality. ” We create  a cocoon  with  our thoughts  
that completely  covers  all of the qualities  that are innate  in us and have  
always  been  present  within  the mind.  We  waste  the nature  of  our mind —in  
the sense  that  it is so hidden  that  it is effectively  dormant.  Liberation  refers  
to bringing  the mind  out from  this obscuration  or cocoon.
By relying  upon  a wise  guru,  the guru ’s blessings  enter  our heart  and this 
produces  extraordinary  experience  and  realization  and “your  own  mind  will 
be liberated. ” So, having  first relied  upon an authentic  guru, the second

HOW  TO PRACTICE  THE PRELIMINARIES 119
thing  we must  do is meditate  on renunciation,  which  is described  in the 
last two lines of verse 15: “These phenomena  of samsara  are pointless  and 
are the causes  of suffering.  And  since  all of these  things  we have  been  doing  
are pointless,  look at that which  is meaningful. ” We have been  wander ­
ing throughout  the three  realms  of samsara,  and our mind  has been very  
immature,  easily  deceived  and distracted  because  we have  been enthralled  
with  very  interesting  and very  vivid  external  appearances.  We have  become  
extremely  distracted,  and, as a result,  from the time  we are born until the 
time  we die our lives have  been  confused  and agitated.  Our mind  is based  
on this confusion,  and we engage  in a great  deal of  work  and effort  that is 
totally  involved  with  this confusion  that  we have  about  appearances.  All of 
this leads  to a situation  in which  there  is nothing  really  gained  from  these  
situations  that  can never  free us from  suffering.
Superficially,  samsara may appear  to produce  short-term  happiness  and 
benefit,  but even that is not true. If we analyze  the actual  results  of our 
actions,  we see that these  activities  are of no benefit to ourselves  and often  
actually  make  us miserable.  Focusing  on our experiences  and these  external  
appearances  actually  leads  us into  a more  or less constant  state  of  worry  and 
anxiety.  The speech  that we engage  in almost  invariably  leads to attach ­
ment  or anger,  which  causes  us more  mental  and physical  suffering.  And  
the physical  activity  that  we engage  in is mostly  a cause  of  our  physical  pain.  
Furthermore,  anything  material  that we have  accumulated  will eventually  
be lost; any family  or companionship  that we have  will end in separation;  
and any birth  will end in death.  This verse  says we should  rather  “look at 
that which  is meaningful. ” This is to strive  for realization  of the ultimate  
truth  and Mahamudra,  which  brings  liberation.  We should  pursue  what  is 
meaningful  because  the practice  of Mahamudra —as opposed  to worldly  
activities—produces  long-term  happiness  and  final  liberation.  Mahamudra  
also  produces  short-term  happiness  because  it produces  a tranquil  and  happy  
state.  But more  importantly,  it produces  ultimate  liberation  or full buddha-  
hood,  which  is the final  end of all suffering.
Thus  the actual  cultivation  of  meditation  is definitely  necessary.  We have  
to begin  by relying  upon  an authentic  guru,  and  when  we are engulfed  by the 
gurus  blessings,  then  we have to actually  meditate  and keep  on practicing.  
When  we have  begun  to practice  meditation,  it is then necessary  to foster,  
stabilize,  and make  our experience  genuine.
We begin  with the four common  preliminaries,  or four thoughts  that 
turn the mind  to develop  the correct  reliance  upon  an authentic  guru  and

12.0 — TEACHINGS  ON THE GANGES  MAHAMUDRA
the cultivation  of renunciation.  The practice  of relying  on the guru is the 
fourth  “uncommon ” or “special ” preliminary practice  (Tib. ngondro)  of 
guru  yoga.  The  function  of  guru  yoga  is explained  in The  Mahamudra  Lin­
eage  Supplication :
Devotion  is the head  of meditation,  as is taught.
The guru  opens  the treasury  gate to the treasury  of oral  instruction.
To the meditator  who  continually  supplicates  you,
Grant  your  blessing  that  genuine  devotion  is born  within.
Thus the first preliminary  practice  of Mahamudra  is guru yoga, which  
includes  what  we normally  think  of as “the four common  preliminaries, ” 
or “the four thoughts  that turn the mind, ” and the four uncommon  pre­
liminaries  of the ngondro.  We could  also say that all of these  practices  are 
branches  of  guru  yoga.
16. If you are beyond  all grasping  at an object  and grasping  at a 
subject,  that is the monarch  among  all views.
If there  is no distraction,  that is the monarch  among  all meditations.
If there  is no effort,  that is the monarch  among  all conduct.
When  there  is no hope  and no fear, that is the final  result and the 
fruition  has been  attained.
Tilopa  explains  the correct  ascertainment  of the view of Mahamudra  
in verse 16. He begins  by discussing  “grasping, ” which  refers  to fixating  on 
external  objects  and  conditions  and  fixating  or obsessing  on what  appears  in 
our mind.  If  our  view  totally  transcends  these  two  types  of  fixating  (fixating  
upon  objects  and subject),  then  it is called  “the king,  or monarch,  of  views. ” 
This refers  not to the inferential  view of the sutras  but to the experiential  
view  of the tantras.
The second  line of the verse  discusses  meditation:  “If there  is no distrac ­
tion,  that  is the monarch  among  all meditations. ” Normally,  when  we think  
of meditation,  we regard  it as deliberately  forcing  the mind  into a state of 
strong  concentration,  but Tilopa  points  out here that this is not at all what  
meditation  is. Meditation  is simply  not straying  or being  distracted  from  
awareness  of our mind  as being  empty  and having  cognitive  lucidity.  “Not 
being  distracted ” from  this means  keeping  our faculty  of mindfulness  and 
alertness.  Practically  speaking,  this means  that when  a thought  or a dis­

HOW  TO PRACTICE  THE PRELIMINARIES I2.I
turbing  emotion  arises,  we simply  look  directly  at it, and that  maintains  our 
awareness  of the mind  s nature  beyond  distraction.
The next  line is “If there is no effort,  that is the monarch  among  all con­
duct, ” which  means  that within  this experience  of the mind  s nature,  our 
actions  are without  any contrived  intention  and therefore  are spontaneous.  
Then  this uncontrived  activity  will cause  our experience  and realization  to 
flourish  and this is what  is appropriate —the king  of actions.
The last line says that  what  obstructs the accomplishment  of these  prac­
tices  is the hope  that  we will  achieve  some  result  in the future  and the strong  
anxiety  that  it may  not happen.  If we can transcend  this hope  and fear  with  
regard  to some future  experience  of fruition,  then it will manifest.  With  
regard  to the fruition,  Tilopa says, “When  there  is no hope  and no fear, 
that is the final result  and the fruition  has been attained. ” The point here 
is that hope  and fear are unnecessary  and inappropriate  with  regard  to our 
mind.  Maitreya  said,  “There  is nothing  in this that  needs  to be removed  and 
there  is nothing  at all that needs  to be added  to this. ” This  is the same  idea 
that was expressed  in the statement  by Saraha:  “Homage  to the mind  that 
is like a wish-fulfilling  jewel. ” The mind  s essential  nature  is emptiness,  and 
its defining  characteristic  is luminous  clarity,  which  makes  it perfect  just as 
it is. It does not need to be altered  or improved  upon  or to have anything  
removed  from  it in any way. Therefore,  hope  of improving  the mind  or fear 
of  its not improving  is unnecessary  and off  the track.  Through  experiencing  
our  mind  s nature,  we no longer  have  such  hope  or fear—that  is the fruition.
The Ground , Path , and Fruition  of Mahamudra
17. It is beyond  being  an object  of conceptual  focus, and the mind  s 
nature  is lucidity.
There  is no path  to be traversed  and yet, in that way,  you enter  the 
path  of  buddhahood.
There is no object  of meditation,  but if  you become accustomed  to 
this,  you will attain  unsurpassable  awakening.
Having  presented  the ascertainment  of  the view,  meditation,  conduct,  and 
fruition,  the text then  goes  on to explain the three  stages  of  Mahamudra  in 
terms  of the ground  (the foundation),  the path  that must  be taken,  and the 
result  of this undertaking.  The first line of this verse  presents  the ground,  
meaning  that the mind  cannot  be said to exist, not exist,  both exist and

12.1 — TEACHINGS  ON THE GANGES  MAHAMUDRA
not exist,  or neither  exist  nor not exist;  it is beyond  any form  of conceptual  
designation.  And  yet, at the same  time,  it is luminous  clarity  and its nature  
is referred  to as “the unity  of emptiness  and clarity. ”
The second  line presents the path.  Usually,  we conceptualize  the nature  
of the path by thinking,  “I am in samsara,  and I must  get out of it. I must  
therefore  engage  in the Buddhist  path  to get out of  samsara. ” We then  try to 
follow  what  are traditionally  called  the “five paths, ” or the “ten bodhisattva  
stages. ” But this verse  says that,  in fact, there  is no special  path  that  we have  
to traverse:  “There  is no path  to be traversed  and yet, in that  way, you enter  
the path of buddhahood. ” The path  we should  follow  is simply  the correct  
recognition  of the ground.  It is said in a well-known  quotation,  “To genu ­
inely  view that which  is genuine  will create  genuine liberation. ” The  point  
is that the nature  of the ground  is itself  perfect  or pure,  and aside  from a 
correct  recognition  of  this  ground,  there  is simply  no other  path.  On the one 
hand,  there  is no path  to be traversed  because  the mind ’s nature  is what it 
is. The nature  of mind  does not need  to be changed  or improved  upon,  and 
in fact it cannot  be. So, in that sense  there  is no process  to be gone  through.  
On the other  hand,  the recognition  of this nature,  which  is beyond  process,  
is the path  that  produces  awakening.
The third  line discusses  the fruition  of this process.  It says that there  is 
nothing  to be meditated  upon  and that becoming  used  to this process  of 
not meditating  upon  anything  actually  is the meditation  that  will produce  
a positive  result.  There  is a saying  attributed  to Gampopa  that  says,  “In med ­
itation  do not attempt  to remove  the two defects  of  lethargy  or excitement.  
If you try to remove  them,  you will become  like a  frog  trying  to jump  into 
the sky.” There  is nothing  in the practice  of Mahamudra  that one focuses  
on as an object  of meditation,  such  as something  that  might  be visualized.  
There  is no object  of meditation  in that sense.  But the process  of getting  
used  to, or becoming  more  familiar  with,  your  own  nature  is what  is called  
“meditation ” in the Mahamudra  tradition.  And that familiarization  with  
your  own nature  is what  will  lead to buddhahood. 57
How  to Abandon  Distraction  and Rely upon  
Isolation
18. Thoroughly  examine  mundane  things  of  the world.
If you do, you will see that none  of them  persist.
None  of them  are capable  of  permanence,

HOW  TO PRACTICE  THE PRELIMINARIES 123
And  that they  are all like dreams  and magical  illusions.
Dreams  and magical  illusions  are meaningless.
Therefore,  generate  renunciation  and abandon  mundane  concerns.
“Thoroughly  examine  mundane  things  of  the world. ” If  you do, you  will see 
that  none  of  them  persist,  none  are capable  of permanence,  and  in that  sense,  
they  are all like dreams  and magical  illusions.  Dreams  and magical  illusions  
are meaningless.  Therefore,  generate  renunciation  and give up mundane  
concerns.  The point  of these  lines  is that there  is no reason  to be obsessed  
with  mundane  concerns  because  all of these  things  that  we allow  ourselves  
to become  so obsessed  with,  or attached  to, are in their  very nature  unfit  
for attachment  since they are constantly  changing.  They  cannot,  as much  
as we may  want  them  to, remain  the same.  Therefore,  it is inappropriate  to 
make  an emotional  investment  in their remaining  the same.  In fact, this 
obsession,  this attachment  to things  and  the resulting  aversion  toward  other  
things,  produces  all kinds  of problems,  impediments,  suffering,  and  so forth.
All the connections  that  we have  with  objects  of  our ordinary  perception  
are usually  of one of two types:  they  are based  on either  our attachment  or 
our aggression.  It is said that our attachment is like boiling  water  and our 
aggression  is like a blazing  fire. Attachment  occurs  whenever we identify  
with  someone  or something  as “mine, ” such  as “my friend, ” “my family, ” or 
“someone  who  will help  me.” The disturbing  emotion  of  aggression  or aver­
sion  occurs  whenever  we identify  with  someone  or something  who  we think  
will  hurt  us and  we think,  “I dislike  this  situation  or this is my enemy. ” Most  
of the connections  we make  with others  and situations  around  us are not 
beneficial  to us because  any form  of attachment  (even  though  we think  it 
will  make  us happy)  is in its nature  a cause  for  worry,  fear,  and agitation,  and 
the nature  of aggression  or anger  also causes  misery.  Not only does anger  
cause  us to suffer but the actions  we engage  in based  upon  anger  produce  
suffering  for others  as well.  So, we are advised  in these  lines  to sever  all these  
connections  to the world.
19. Cut through  the bonds  of attachment  and aversion  toward  those  
around  you and  your  surroundings.
Meditate  in isolated  retreats, forests,  and so forth,  living  alone.
Remain  in that state  without  meditation.
When  you attain  that  which  is without  attainment,  you have  
attained  Mahamudra.

114 — TEACHINGS  ON THE GANGES  MAHAMUDRA
The next two verses  are concerned  with the importance  of practice  in 
solitude  or isolation.  Verse  18 had pointed  out that all the phenomena  of 
this world  are neither  stable  nor permanent  but rather  are like what  is per­
ceived  in a dream  or a magical  illusion.  Besides  being  impermanent,  external  
phenomena  are also meaningless,  being  empty  of any real substance.  So, 
we are advised  to live without  craving  and attachment  for things  in this 
world,  to cultivate  contentment,  and to abandon  mundane  activities.  Then  
the first two lines  of verse  19 suggest that if you want  to practice,  you have  
to become  independent  from  what  is around  you. What  is being  especially  
extolled  here is the virtue  of  practicing  in an isolated  situation.  The last two 
lines say, “Remain  in that state  without  meditation.  When  you attain  that 
which  is without  attainment,  you have  attained  Mahamudra. ” The medita ­
tion  practice  that  is to be conducted  in solitude  is, in a sense,  to be free from  
meditation  because  there  is no object  of meditation.  And  what  is attained  
through  meditation  in solitude  in this  way  is the attainment  of  nothing  new. 
It is an attainment that is beyond  what  we would  usually  call attainment.  
But when  you realize  that there  is nothing  to be changed,  nothing  to be 
attained,  that  is the attainment  of Mahamudra.
This verse  gives us the instruction  of what  we should  do. We should  
sever  all connections,  and having  severed  all samsaric  connections,  we are 
instructed  to remain  in solitude.  Normally,  when  we think  of meditation  
in a solitary  retreat,  we assume  that  it involves  thinking  or meditating  upon  
something,  but the meditation  that  is being  suggested  here  is simply  to tran­
scend  our confused  projections  by allowing  ourselves  to rest in the experi ­
ence of the nature  of our mind.  There  is no process  of practice  other  than  
this one, so it says, “Remain  in that state without  meditation, ” meaning  
that  we should  cultivate  the one-pointed  meditation  or samadhi  of Maha ­
mudra.  The benefit  of  practicing  in a solitary  retreat  is that  we will develop  
the clarity  and tranquillity  of samadhi,  which  can be easier  to accomplish  
under  these  circumstances.
We should  also  realize  that  it is not correct  to think  that  Mahamudra  can 
be practiced  only  in retreat.  In the biographies  of the eighty-four  mahasid-  
dhas of India,  we can see that each mahasiddha  had their  own particular  
lifestyle  and style  of practice. 58 For example,  Nagarjuna  was a great  scholar  
who  composed  a vast  number  of profound  treatises  while  ruling  over  a large  
community  of ordained  sangha.  While  fulfilling  his responsibilities  as a 
leader  in the sangha  and  composing  many  treatises  on previously  unknown  
areas of knowledge,  he was still able to practice  Mahamudra  and obtain

HOW  TO PRACTICE  THE PRELIMINARIES 115
supreme  siddhi  (enlightenment).  Another  example  is King  Indrabhuti,  who  
reigned  over a considerable  region  and consequently  lived  in the midst  of 
great  luxury, with a magnificent  palace,  a wonderful  retinue,  and so forth.  
Yet in the midst  of  all this  luxury,  he had  no attachment  to anything  around  
him and was able to practice  Mahamudra  and attain  supreme  siddhi.  A 
third  example is, of course, Tilopa,  who  was poor  and penniless  and at one 
point  devoted  himself  to the lowly  job of grinding sesame  seeds to pro­
duce sesame  oil to be sold. While  in the midst  of this work,  he was able 
to meditate  on Mahamudra  and obtain  supreme  siddhi.  So regardless  of 
their  different  lifestyles,  all the mahasiddhas  fostered  this recognition  of 
the mind  s fundamental  nature  and maintained  a mental  discipline  that 
prevented  their  minds  from  running  wild.
We can also see a similar  diversity  of lifestyles  in the practitioners  who 
lived in Tibet,  when  the doctrine  of Mahamudra  spread  to that country.  
Naropa ’s student  Marpa,  his student  Milarepa,  and Milarepa ’s student  
Gampopa  are referred  to as “the three  forefathers ” of the Kagyu teachings.  
These  three  teachers  had three  quite  different  lifestyles.  Marpa  was quite  
wealthy  and had a family  with seven  sons and was engaged  in a variety  of 
mundane  activities  necessary  to maintain  family  and farm,  yet at the same  
time he was able to practice  Mahamudra  and was able to attain  supreme  
siddhi  in one lifetime.  On the conventional  level  of  reality,  one can say that 
he was quite  attached  to his family.  There  was one occasion  in India  when  
Naropa  prophesied  to Marpa,  “Your dharma  lineage  will flourish like  the 
current  of a vast river,  but your  family  line  will disappear  like a sky flower. ” 
Marpa  responded,  “Thank  you very much  for the first prophecy.  Is there  
anything  we can do  to change  the second?  I have  seven  sons.  Surely  at least  
one of them  will be able to produce  a family  lineage. ” Naropa  responded,  
"Never  mind  your  seven  sons.  Even  if  you  were  to have  a thousand  sons,  you 
wouldn ’t be able to change  this. ” So although  on the conventional  level  he 
appeared  to have  been  attached  to his family,  he was  still  able  to practice  and 
achieve  Mahamudra.  Marpa  s student  Milarepa,  on the other  hand,  lived  his 
whole  life in circumstances  of utmost  simplicity,  asceticism,  and freedom  
from unnecessary  activity.  Milarepa ’s student  Gampopa  exemplified  yet 
another  lifestyle;  he was an ordained  monk  who lived  in a monastery  and 
ruled  over  an ordained  sangha.  The point  of these  three  examples  is, again,  
that there  is no one lifestyle  that is required  for practicing  Mahamudra  and 
there  is no one lifestyle  that is necessary  for the realization  of  Mahamudra.  
What  is necessary  is the cultivation  of the samadhi  of  Mahamudra.

TEACHINGS  ON THE GANGES  MAHAMUDRA 12.6 —
If we practice  the samadhi  of Mahamudra,  we will be able to achieve  
the realization  of Mahamudra.  The last line of this verse  says, “When  you 
attain  that which  is without  attainment,  you have attained  Mahamudra. ” 
This means  that what is attained  when  you attain  Mahamudra  is not 
something  original  or new. All that happens  is that the previously  unre ­
vealed,  unrecognized  true nature  of phenomena  is revealed.  Normally,  
we don ’t recognize  this true nature  and are therefore  very confused.  By 
receiving  and applying  the instructions  of our guru,  we become  free of 
confusion  and false projections.  These  are then replaced  by unconfused  
experience,  and this unconfused  experience  is referred  to here  as the attain ­
ment  that is “without  attainment. ”
zo. For example,  if the single  taproot  of a tree with  many  branches,  
leaves, flowers,  and fruit  is cut.
Then  all will automatically  die.
In the same  way, if the root  of mind  is cut through,
Then  all the branches  and leaves  of samsara  will dry up.
While  Mahamudra  is essentially  one  path  and one  practice,  nevertheless,  
by practicing  this one path,  we attain  freedom from  all the various  types  of 
suffering  that  exist.  There  are many  types  of  suffering  in samsara.  There  are 
the sufferings  of the hell realms  (extreme  heat and cold),  the sufferings  of 
the hungry  ghost  realms  (hunger  and thirst),  and so forth;  these  are called  
the “sufferings  of the six realms. ”59 Then,  there  are different  causes  of these  
various types  of suffering;  each  type  is caused  by different  disturbing  emo ­
tions.  We might  think  that, in order  to free ourselves  from each of these  
sufferings  and each causal  disturbing  emotion,  we need  to apply  a specific  
remedy  for each.  But this is not the case. While  it is true that the Buddha  
did teach  eighty-four thousand  different  types of Dharma  to serve  as rem­
edies  for eighty-four  thousand different  types  of disturbing  emotions  and 
their resultant  sufferings,  nevertheless,  in this approach  of following  the 
oral instructions  (Tib.  men  ngak ), instead  of  resorting  to different  antidotes  
or remedies,  we resort  to one remedy,  which  is to recognize  the nature  of 
mind  and the nature  of  all external  phenomena.  When  this nature  is recog ­
nized,  then  through  the power  of  this realization,  all the various  disturbing  
emotions  are abandoned,  which  causes  all the various  types  of suffering  to 
be alleviated,  or we could  say, transcended.

HOW  TO PRACTICE  THE PRELIMINARIES 127
Tilopa  speaks further  about  the benefits  of the practice of Mahamudra.  
He gives the example  that  if the single  taproot  of  a tree with  many  branches  
and leaves  is cut, all the leaves  and branches  will automatically  die. The 
meaning  of this verse is that the practice  of the Vajrayana,  especially  the 
practice  of  Mahamudra  or Dzogchen,  consists  most  fundamentally  of  look­
ing directly  at the nature  of our own mind.  The function  of this practice  
in both  traditions  is to cut through our  confused  mind  and recognize that 
nature  once and for all. These  two traditions  are distinct,  but their  funda ­
mental  practices  are the same.  If we want  to free ourselves  from all of the 
various  sufferings  that grow  on the tree of samsara and we attempt to free 
ourselves  from  these  adverse  conditions  and various  sufferings  one by one, 
it is extremely  difficult.  It is like trying  to kill a tree by removing  each leaf 
separately.  If  we want  to free ourselves  from  the various  physical  and mental  
sufferings  of samsara,  then,  if we recognize  the nature  of our mind,  auto ­
matically  all sufferings  are pacified  and  we are liberated  from  all of them.
The Benefits  of Meditation  upon  Mahamudra
21. For example,  just as the darkness  that has accumulated  over  a 
thousand  eons is dispelled  by the illumination  of one lamp,
In the same  way, one  instant  of the wisdom  of the clear  light  of ones  
mind  dispels  all the ignorance,  wrongdoing,  and obscurations  
accumulated  throughout  numerous  eons.
Imagine  a room  that  has been  sealed  in total  darkness  for centuries  and has 
received  no sunlight,  moonlight,  starlight,  lamplight,  or light  of any kind.  
We  would  then  think  that  the darkness  itself  is stable,  thick,  and  substantial.  
Yet, regardless  of  how  long  this room  has been  without  any illumination,  as 
soon  as a candle  is lit in that  room,  all the darkness  is dispelled  in an instant.  
In the same  way, the nature  of everyone ’s mind  has always  had this clear  
light,  or luminosity,  which  is referred  to as Samantabhadra  in the Nyingma  
tradition  and Vajradhara  in the Sarma  tradition. 60 Although  this buddha  
nature  has always  been  present,  it has never  been recognized and therefore  
it is like a darkness  that  has been  present  since  beginningless  time. 61 By not 
recognizing  it, we have become  confused.  Yet through  our gurus  instruc ­
tions,  our guru ’s blessings,  and our own  practice  and  devotion,  it is possible  
to recognize  this nature  for the first time. When  full recognition  of this

128 — TEACHINGS  ON THE GANGES  MAHAMUDRA
nature  occurs,  then,  in that instant,  all obscurations  are dispelled,  much  as 
the darkness  in the sealed  room  is dispelled  when  a candle  is lit.
The realization  of Mahamudra  is said to be very  powerful  because if it is 
complete  realization,  it removes  in one instant  three  things:  ignorance  (Tib.  
marikpa ), wrongdoing  (Tib.  dikpa ), and obscuration  (Tib. drippa).  Igno ­
rance  is the opposite  of  rikpa  (awareness).  The  presence  of  awareness  is called  
“the dharmadhatu ” in the Mahayana  teachings.  In the Foundation  school,  
awareness  is expressed  as the “selflessness  of  persons, ” and in the Vajrayana,  
it is called  the “unity  of luminous  clarity  and emptiness. ” That awareness  
is called rikpayeshe  (the wisdom  that is awareness).  Also  the failure to rec­
ognize  this true nature  is called  by different  names  in different  Buddhist  
teachings.  Whether  we talk about  the failure  to recognize  the “selflessness  
of  persons, ” the failure  to recognize the “emptiness  of  phenomena, ” or “not 
recognizing  the nature  of Mahamudra ”—they all refer to ignorance  or 
marikpa  (where  ma means “not” and rikpa  means  “awareness).  Fundamen ­
tally,  both  of the main  types  of obscuration —the obscuration  of wisdom  
and the obscuration  of  the disturbing  emotions —stem  from  this  marikpa.  
Therefore,  awareness  {rikpa)  realizes  the egolessness  of self, the emptiness  
of  phenomena,  and Mahamudra,  in the three  vehicles  of Buddhism —that 
is, the Foundation  Vehicle,  Mahayana  Vehicle,  and Vajrayana  Vehicle,  
respectively.
When  we are under  the influence  of  ignorance,  our  actions,  or karma,  pro­
duces  imprints  of negative  actions,  referred  to as “obscurations ” or “veils. ” 
All of this ignorance  and the result  of negative  actions  and other  forms  
of obscurations  have been with us since beginningless  time,  yet the wis­
dom  that recognizes  dharmata  can dispel  these  obscurations  in an instant.  
Wrongdoing  and the karmic  accumulation  of the imprint  of actions  are 
also dispelled  by the realization  of Mahamudra.  This verse  illustrates  the 
profundity  and power  of  this realization.
You might  doubt  this, thinking,  for example,  that  in the sutras  the Bud­
dha says that one cannot  attain  buddhahood  without  undergoing  three  
periods  of innumerable  eons in which  one accumulates  the collections  of 
merit  and wisdom;  therefore  to realize  dharmata must  take an extremely  
long  time  according  to the sutras.  Yet in the Mahamudra  tradition,  we are 
told  that  we can attain  the state  of  complete  awakening,  the state  of  unity  or 
Vajradhara,  in one lifetime  and  one body.  Surely  if one of these  is true,  then  
the other  must  not be. In fact, this is not a contradiction.  If someone  pos-

HOW  TO PRACTICE  THE PRELIMINARIES 119
sesses  the pith,  or oral,  instructions,  then  it is possible  to attain  buddhahood  
in one lifetime.  When  someone  engages  in the path  and does not have the 
oral instructions  of  the Mahamudra,  then  essentially  they  are taking  logical  
analysis  as the basis of the path to ascertain  the emptiness  of  phenomena.  
Using  logical  analysis,  one can develop  confidence  in the emptiness  of  phe­
nomena,  but that confidence  is very  difficult  to apply  in actual  meditation  
practice.  To be able to apply that logical  certainty  to meditation  practice,  
one needs  to gather  a tremendous  amount  of merit  over a very  long  period  
of  time.  That  is why  the path  of  logical  inference  takes  so long.
The tradition  according  to which  we can attain  the state  of Vajradhara  in 
one lifetime  is the tradition  that is based  upon  these  oral instructions.  The 
essence  of these  instructions  is that we do not attempt  to analyze  external  
objects  or appearances  but  we work  with  our  mind.  The reason  why  we work  
with our mind  in the tradition  of these  oral instructions  is that although  
other  things  have  to be logically  proven to be empty,  our mind  is obviously  
empty.  We can experience  the emptiness  or insubstantiality  of our own 
mind  at any time.  Because  we are working  with  something  that  is obviously  
empty, we experience  the same  emptiness  that  is arrived  at through  logical  
analysis.  We do this directly,  from  the beginning,  when  we learn  to medi ­
tate. So, this is taking  direct  experience  (direct  valid  cognition)  as the pri­
mary  technique  of the path.  Because  of the direct  experience  of the nature  
of mind,  it is possible to attain  full buddhahood  in one lifetime.
This  statement  that it is possible  to attain  buddhahood  in one lifetime  is 
not simply  an expression.  Many  mahasiddhas  have  actually  done  it.
Questions
Question:  What  is the difference  between  the experience  of being  empty  
and of  being  spaced  out?
Rinpoche:  There  is a great  difference.  States  of being  spaced  out, such as 
being  in Shamatha  meditation  that  lacks  mental  clarity,  are characterized  by 
an absence  of  intelligence,  or prajna.  Being  spaced  out or in the state  of  men ­
tal dullness  is essentially  a state  of  stupidity  characterized  by being  without  
critical  thought.  But this absence  of conceptuality  is really  just a sort of 
stupidity,  whereas  a recognition  of dharmata —the nature  of the mind  as 
empty —is a wisdom  that  has the characteristic  of unshakable  certainty.  It

130 TEACHINGS  ON THE GANGES  MAHAMUDRA
has been said by siddhas  in the past that when  you have this recognition,  
even if one hundred  buddhas  appeared in the sky in front  of  you and said,  
“That ’s not it,” you would  say, “Yes it is, because  I have  seen it directly. ” For 
example,  I can see the vajra  that is on the table  in front  of me, and  having  
. seen it, even if one hundred  people  were  to say to me, “There is no vajra  on 
that  table  in front  of  you, ” I would  think  their  claim  was meaningless  and it 
would  not shake  my conviction  because  I have  actually  seen  it. So, it’s a state  
of  wisdom  that is totally  without  doubt.
Question:  Rinpoche,  the text  said  that  the  practice  of Mahamudra  involves  
no focus  or mindfulness  of  the mind  with  a particular  focus.  Another  teach ­
ing  from  Tilopa ’s text  is that  whenever  a disturbing  emotion  arises,  you look  
directly  at it. So, it seems  as if in the practice  of Mahamudra  you are going  
from  an unfocused  resting  of  the mind  to a focused  direct  looking  at some ­
thing.  Particularly,  this movement  from  nonfocus  to focus  becomes  difficult  
in postmeditation when  there  are so many  distractions.  I experience  this 
when  driving  during  rush  hour.  I must  pay attention  to the road,  and then  
to look  at the mind  undistracted  at this time  seems  very  difficult.
Rinpoche:  First  of all, as you say, there  is no object  of  meditation  in Maha ­
mudra,  but that is from the point  of view of an unconfused  or ultimate  
state.  From  the point  of view  of the relative level,  there  is a focus,  which  is 
an object.  For example,  when  a thought arises,  then at the initial  moment  
of directing  your  awareness  to looking  at the nature  of that thought, there  
is a conceptual  focus.  Because  the thought  arising  is a relative  truth  and 
is confused,  you are working  in a context  of ignorance  or bewilderment.  
When  you actually  see the nature  of that thought,  it is not there.  So when  
you look,  there  is a focus,  but when  you see, there  is no focus.
The essence  of postmeditation  practice  is simply  not to be distracted  from  
whatever  you are doing.  There  is far less danger  in driving  a car if you are 
not distracted  and are mindful  and alert,  than  there  is in driving  when  you 
are distracted.  So, in fact,  postmeditation  mindfulness  and alertness  should  
alleviate  the fear of  having  an accident.
Question:  Rinpoche,  if the nature  of  all phenomena  is emptiness  and if  we 
look  at a bubble  and  it pops,  there  is nothing  there,  or if we look  at fear,  there  
is nothing  there.  I’m wondering  if it is the same  when  we look  at family  or 
friends. Is it the same  emptiness?

HOW  TO PRACTICE  THE PRELIMINARIES  — 131
Rinpoche: There  are many  logical  demonstrations  of  the emptiness  of phe­
nomena  and of  persons.  But these  arguments  are not applied  in the context  
of meditation  practice  because  we are concerned  with the direct  experi ­
ence  of mind.  The  easiest,  most  direct  experience  of  emptiness is the direct  
experience  of the nature  of mind.  So, in the practice  of Mahamudra,  we do 
not analyze  the existence  of external  objects  or persons  but examine  only  
thoughts,  which  can be experienced  directly  without  recourse  to analysis.  It 
is said in our tradition,  “Do not attempt  to eliminate,  create,  or alter  exter ­
nal appearances.  Just leave  them  as they are because  they do you no harm  
and  bringyou  no benefit. ” The  external  appearances  are not the issue  here;  it 
is the mind  and the mind  s grasping  at them  that  is the problem.  Therefore,  
we take thought  and mind  as the basis  for meditation.
Something  that is important  to understand  is the question  of  what  does  
and what does not constitute  distraction.  Tilopa  said, “Child,  it is not 
appearances  that fetter  you,  but craving.  Therefore,  Naropa,  cut through  
craving. ” A distinction  needs  to be made  between  appearances  and our 
craving  for or grasping  at them.  Appearances  themselves  are not a problem,  
but grasping  at them  is problematic.  When  you study  the Dharma,  you are 
training  your  intellect  through  the acquisition  of knowledge  and you are 
practicing  to learn  more  efficiently.  That  training  of the intellect,  that cul­
tivation  of the prajna,  is not a problem  because  you are essentially  working  
with  luminous  clarity,  which  is one of  the major  qualities  of  your  mind  (the 
other  quality  being  emptiness).  The problem  is with  grasping  at, or fixating  
on, the concepts  acquired  through knowledge.  The way to work  with this 
is simply to study  in such  a way that  you cultivate  mindfulness  within  the 
studying;  if you  have  mindfulness  and  alertness  while  you are studying,  then  
your intellectual  study  will not cause  any grasping  or attachment.  In this 
way,  you can mix  your  meditation  and studying.
Question:  Rinpoche,  I wonder  if you could  provide  some  clarity  on the 
meditation  instruction  in Mahamudra.  I understand  that  when  disturbing  
emotions  arise in meditation,  we should  feel the context  of the disturbing  
emotion,  feel the essence  of  the distraction  without  the content.  Is this sim­
ilar to looking  directly  at the disturbing  emotion?
Rinpoche:  These  two  ways  of working  with  disturbing  emotions  are differ ­
ent. The approach  that you described,  in which  you try to feel the texture  
of the disturbing  emotion  and appreciate  the origin  of it, is based  upon

132. TEACHINGS  ON THE GANGES  MAHAMUDRA
maintaining  the concept  of the disturbing  emotion ’s existence  in the first 
place.  Basically,  what  you are doing  in this approach  is treating  the disturb ­
ing emotion  as something.  What  we are doing  in Mahamudra  is not work ­
ing with what  the disturbing  emotion  seems  to be but with what  it really  
is. Looking  directly  at it without  becoming  concerned  with  its appearance  
allows  you to experience  it as being  more  like nothing  than  something.  The 
significance  of  this is that  the way  that  you actually  let go of  disturbing  emo ­
tions  is through  perceiving  that they  have  no substantial  existence  whatso ­
ever.  The  technique  described  in this  text  is to look  directly  at the disturbing  
emotion  and in that  way  see its nature.  What  you experience  was explained  
earlier  in the text as seeing  them  as ripples  or designs  drawn  on the surface  
of  water.  As these  waves  are emerging,  they  are already  dissolving.
Question:  I believe  that there  are passages  by other  authors  that say that 
there  is no self-awareness  and that the mind  cannot  see itself.  Could  you 
please  say more  on that?
Rinpoche:  If you read Shantideva ’s The Way of the Bodhisattva , you will 
come  across  the statement,  “There  is no such thing  as self-awareness.  The 
mind  cannot  see or know  itself. ” Also,  if  you read  Chandrakirti ’s Introduc ­
tion  to the  Middle  Way , you  will  find  many  similar  statements  such  as “There  
is no self-awareness;  the mind  cannot  see or know  itself. ” I mention  this 
because  some of  you may  have read these  texts  and  when  you encountered  
statements  such  as these,  you might  have  thought, “Shantideva  and Chan ­
drakirti  say that  the mind  cannot  know  itself,  so what  I heard  about  looking  
at the mind  is nonsense. ” Shantideva  and Chandrakirti  were  making  these  
statements  as a refutation  of the  view  that  the mind  is a substantially  existent  
thing.  They  are refuting  the view  that  the mind  as a substantial  thing  could  
experience  itself  as a substantial  thing.  The mind,  of  course,  does  not expe ­
rience itself  as substance,  which  means  that,  when  you look  at your  mind ’s 
nature,  you do not experience any substantial  characteristic.  When  you do 
experience  the mind,  you are not experiencing  what  Shantideva  and Chan ­
drakirti  say you cannot  experience. There  is, in fact, no contradiction  here.  
When  you look  at thoughts  or at the mind  itself,  what  you experience  is the 
nature  of those  thoughts,  the nature  of  that mind,  which  is emptiness.  You 
do not experience  a substantial  presence.  You experience  something  that 
is beyond  elaboration,  beyond any kind  of conceptualization.  But because  
mind  has this innate  capacity  of cognition,  we characterize  it as a unity  of

HOW  TO PRACTICE  THE PRELIMINARIES 133
emptiness  and luminous  clarity.  So the context  of the Ganges  Mahamudra,  
which  states  that  the mind  can know  itself,  being  self-aware,  and  the context  
of Shantidevas  and Chandrakirti  s texts,  which  state  that the mind  cannot  
know  itself,  are two contexts  that  are distinct  from  each  other.

How  to Practice  the  Main Body  of 
Mahamudra
This  section  of  the Ganges  Mahamudra  is the main  practice  and it is divided  
into four  sections.
The Practice  for  Those  of the Highest  Faculties
Kyeho\
The explanation  of the practice  from  the point  of  view  of those  of  the high ­
est faculties  begins  with  Tilopas  expression  of  delight  in Mahamudra  itself,  
with  Kye  ho. Through  the practice  of  Mahamudra,  we need  not go through  
three  periods  of innumerable  eons of gathering  accumulations  in order  to 
achieve  enlightenment.  Rather,  we can go through  this practice  of Vajra- 
dhara  in one body  and in one lifetime.  The Mahamudra  path is easy and, 
not only  easy,  it is also extraordinarily  powerful  in dispelling  all the obscu ­
rations  of ignorance.  Tilopais  also  expressing  his delight  in the possibility  of 
actually  transmitting  Mahamudra  to someone  else,  in this case,  to Naropa.
This  is in contrast  to the Buddhas  exclamation  that  he made  after  reach ­
ing enlightenment  under  the bodhi  tree when  he said, “I have found  a 
profound,  tranquil  Dharma  that transcends  all elaborations,  and it is like 
healing  nectar.  Yet no matter  to whom  I would  explain  this Dharma,  no 
one would  be able to understand  it. It is better  that I remain  silent. ” This  
expression  of sadness  by the Buddha  is understood  as a way of expressing  
the profundity  of the Dharma.  In any case, in this instance,  Tilopa  is not 
expressing  himself  in that way but is sharing  his genuine  delight  because

there  is someone  he can transmit  Mahamudra  to and so someone else will  
also directly  benefit  from  this practice.
22. The intellect  cannot  see that  which  is beyond  conceptual  mind.
You  will never  realize  that  which  is uncreated  through  created  
dharmas.
If you wish  to realize  that  which  is beyond  the intellect  and is 
uncreated.
Then  scrutinize  your  mind,  and strip  awareness  naked.
This verse  begins  by explaining  that the conceptual  mind  cannot expe ­
rience  something  that is nonconceptual  in nature;  it cannot  see what is 
beyond it. Next it says that you will never realize  that which  “is uncreated  
through  created  dharmas, ” where  “dharmas ” are any facts or truths.  This 
means  that any attempt  to fabricate  realization— through  inferential  rea­
soning  or fabricated  meditations— cannot  truly  help us discover the fun­
damental  nature.  In other  words,  through  conceptual  fabrication,  we fail 
to realize the nature  of the mind.  The mistakes that  can occur  through  the 
tendency  to intellectualize  are pointed  out in many  subsequent  meditation  
instructions  of  the Kagyu  lineage.  These  are traditionally  explained  in terms  
of  the mistakes  that  we can make  with  regard  to emptiness,  which  are called  
“turning  emptiness  into an antidote, ” “turning  it into a seal, ” or more  liter­
ally, “getting  lost in emptiness  of the ground  of  all that is knowable. ”
The expression  “Getting  lost in emptiness  as a seal” means  that when  
a disturbing  emotion  arises,  we begin  to think,  “Oh, this is no problem  
because  its nature is empty. ” But this is not a true experience;  it is just an 
intellectual  attitude.  The  “seal, ” in this case,  means  trying  to seal your  expe ­
rience  with an intellectual  idea of emptiness.  “Getting  lost in emptiness  
of the ground  of all that is knowable ” again  means  trying  to conceptually  
develop  a certainty  that emptiness  is the nature  of all things.  While  from  
one point  of  view, having  such  certainty  is good,  nevertheless,  because  it is 
just an intellectual  concept,  it is not appropriate  for the practice  of Maha ­
mudra  and is therefore  a deviation.  The deviation  called  “getting  lost in 
emptiness as an antidote ” is the belief  that if you conceptually  meditate  on 
emptiness,  the disturbing  emotions  will disappear  when  they arise.  What  
these  three  types  of errors  have in common  is that they are all conceptual  
and  are attempts  to produce  something  through  the application  of concepts.136 — TEACHINGS  ON THE GANGES  MAHAMUDRA

HOW  TO PRACTICE  THE MAIN  BODY137
The alternative  to these  deviations  is the direct  experience  of dharmata,  
or “the nature  of phenomena, ” which  transcends  concept  and transcends  
intellect  and is not constructed  by any  kind  of conceptualization.  The last 
line explains  how to do this: “Scrutinize  your mind,  and strip awareness  
naked. ” Scrutinize  can be taken  in two different  ways.  We might  under ­
stand  scrutinize  to mean  to analyze  the mind,  but that is not what  it means  
here.  Analyzing  the mind  is trying  to determine  through  logic  exactly  what  
the mind  must  be like.  When  we try to think  about  the mind,  the process  is 
endless  because  there  are endless  thoughts  or concepts  that  can be generated  
about  the mind.  The mind  generates  thoughts,  and we think  that because  
we experience  thoughts,  they  must  exist  too. And  we experience  disturbing  
emotions,  so we think  they  too must  exist.  In this way, we end up with  an 
endless  procession  of things  that appear  to exist.  Here  scrutinize  means  to 
look directly  at the mind  and to try to experience  directly  whether  it is 
something  or nothing.  If it is something,  what  is it? What  is it like? If it 
is nothing,  what  is that like? By looking  directly  at the mind,  we begin  to 
have a direct  experience  of the mind  that is beyond  any concept  that you 
might  logically  generate.  By scrutinizing  the mind  in a direct  way,  in effect,  
we strip the mind of conceptualizations  about  it, and that is called  “strip ­
ping  awareness  naked. ” The kernel  or essence  of mind is awareness,  which  
is revealed  when  we stop conceptualizing  what  the mind is like. If we rest 
in that  direct  experience  of our minds  nature,  then  we will come to realize  
that it is meaning  that is beyond  the intellect  and beyond  any attempt  to 
create  anything.
Again,  there are two possible  ways to understand  “to scrutinize  the 
mind. ” We might  consider  scrutinizing  the mind  to be watching  it and 
thinking,  “Now  I am thinking. Now  I am happy.  Now  such and such  dis­
turbing  emotion  is arising, ” and so forth.  Except during  the beginning  of 
practicing  Shamatha,  this approach  has no benefit  and is not what  is meant  
by scrutinizing  the mind.  In this verse,  it means  to look  directly  at the mind  
without  saying  that it is one thing  or another,  to experience its nature  just 
as it is. This  nature  of the mind  can be observed  as being  empty,  or as being  
luminous  clarity,  or it can be observed  as being  both  these  qualities.  It is this 
nature  that we have not yet recognized.  To recognize this nature  is then  to 
rest in this “naked  awareness. ” The term naked  here means  “direct,  with ­
out anything  in-between ”—without  any kind  of  veil between  that  which  is 
looking  at the mind  and  that  which  is being  looked  at. Normally,  we process

138 — TEACHINGS  ON THE GANGES  MAHAMUDRA
everything  we experience  through  a veil of intellectualization.  As long as 
we do not abandon  looking  though  this veil, we will never experience  the 
direct  nature  of mind.
There  are many  different  instructions  on meditation,  and as Patrul  Rin-  
poche  has said, “Some  are better  than  others. ” We can use “the guidance  of 
the words  of a pandita ” or “the guidance  of the experience  of a meditator. ” 
A pandita  is a scholar  who tends  to elaborate  with a lot of references  to 
texts and their  philosophical  underpinning.  While  this type of approach  
is elegant,  it is not profound;  that is, it is not practical.  The  guidance  of an 
experienced  meditator  is less elegant  and certainly  less complicated  but it is 
practical  because  it is easy to understand  and therefore  easy to use. So, we 
are advised  to abandon  the guidance  of a pandita and to make  use of the 
experiential  guidance  of a meditator.
The main  emphasis  in this section  of the text is to let go of intellectual  
contrivances  such as inferential  reasoning.  Yet, to let go of all intellectual ­
ization  may  make  it possible  to go astray  in a different  manner —by becom ­
ing too attached  to experiences  in meditation.  There  is a certain  type of 
experience  that  can arise  in our meditation  that can be deceptive,  and this 
deceptive  experience  can  veil our  naked  awareness  and  prevent  us from  expe ­
riencing  mind  directly.  These  deceptions  are called  “temporary  experiences ” 
(Tib. nyani)  that can veil our awareness.  The first  deception  is the nyam  of 
bliss,  which  is traditionally  called  “being  stuck  to the glue of the disturbing  
emotions. ” This  is an experience  in meditation  where  there  is comfort,  bliss,  
and  joy. Being  so delighted  with  this feeling,  we identify  with  this bliss.  But 
this bliss  is not awareness  (Tib.  rikpa).  A second  temporary  experience  is an 
experience  of  intense  luminous  clarity.  We then  identify  with  this  very  clear  
thinking,  with  an experience  of  brilliant  lucid  insight,  and  that  can obscure  
our direct  experience  of awareness.  The third  temporary  experience  is the 
distinct  experience  of  nonconceptuality —the experience  of  not having  any 
thoughts.
These  three temporary  experiences  are much  different  from the true 
experience  of realization.  Although  the nature  of  actual  realization can be 
blissful  and  lucid,  nevertheless,  the qualities  of  these  temporary  experiences  
are  very  different  from  the quality  of  true  realization.  The  siddhas  of  the  past 
have  said  that these  temporary  experiences  do not last—they  are here  today  
and  gone  tomorrow —and  we should  not get caught  up in them  by believing  
that  they  are signs  of  true realization.  Temporary  experiences  are created  by 
the process  of meditation  and are just a veil over  our awareness.

HOW  TO PRACTICE  THE MAIN  BODY 139
23. Allow  the cloudy  water  of thought  to clarify  itself.
Do not attempt  to stop or create  appearances.
Leave  them  as they  are.
If you are without  acceptance  and rejection  of  external  appearances,
All that appears and exists  will be liberated  as Mahamudra.
This  verse  is concerned  with  resting  in the state  of  Mahamudra,  which  is 
called  the “even  placement  of  Mahamudra. ” We can do this even  placement  
as ordinary  individuals.  If  we have  gone  through  the process  of  scrutinizing  
the mind  by looking  for the mind  in a very  precise manner,  we will be able 
to rest in naked  awareness.  Nevertheless,  from  time to time,  when  we are 
engaged in the even  placement  of  Mahamudra,  thoughts  will arise as con­
cepts.  Now  the nature  of thought  is conceptual,  and the nature  of the even  
placement  of Mahamudra  is nonconceptual  transcending  the conceptual  
mind.  From  this point  of view,  we could  regard  thoughts  as a problem  or 
defect.  However,  we must  regard  thoughts  as being  like silt that  has been  
stirred  up in a body  of water.  Just as we can allow the water  to be clarified  
by simply  leaving  it alone  so that the silt will naturally  settle  to the bottom,  
in a similar  way, if we allow  our mind  to rest without  being  agitated,  then  
the silt of thought  will settle  down  naturally.  Also,  because  we don ’t have  
to do anything  to eliminate  thoughts,  our thoughts  should  not be regarded  
as harmful.
Similarly,  we should  treat external  appearances —what  we hear, see, 
smell,  feel, and so on—as not being  a problem  either.  Previously,  we had 
pointed  out that Tilopa  said to Naropa,  “Child,  it is not appearances  that 
are the problem,  but it is the clinging  to appearances  that is the problem.  
Therefore  abandon  clinging,  Naropa. ” The same  point  is expressed  in the 
last line of this verse.  Because  appearances  themselves  are just like reflec ­
tions  in a mirror  and cannot  do us any  harm,  we don ’t have  to do anything  
to appearances  themselves  or how  we experience  them.  So, we don ’t have  to 
try to stop appearances, such as reducing  the vividness of appearances, nor 
do we have  to try to turn  them  into anything  other  than  what  they  are—we  
just let them  be as they  are.
All Buddhism  can be divided  into three  vehicles:  the Foundation,  the 
Mahayana,  and the Vajrayana  teachings.  All of these  vehicles  are alike in 
the sense  that they  were  all taught to benefit  beings  and  to tame  their  dis­
turbing  emotions.  So all the vehicles  have  the nature  of the path.  However,  
these  vehicles  have three  different  methods  for dealing  with  the disturbing

emotions.  The approach  of the Foundation  Vehicle  is to abandon  the dis­
turbing  emotions  because  they  are identified  as being  bad or problematic.  
These  Foundation  practitioners,  through  cultivating  an intense  desire  to be 
free of the disturbing  emotions,  seek  to abandon  them.
The  approach  of dealing  with  disturbing  emotions  taken  in the Mahayana  
Vehicle  is one of transformation.  Although  the disturbing  emotions  con­
tinue  to arise  naturally,  by embracing  them  with  an enlightened  heart  (Skt.  
bodhicbitta ), they are slowly  and gradually  transformed.  For example,  our 
tendency  to divide  the world  into friends  and enemies  and to be attached  
to the people  we like and to have aversion  toward  those  we don ’t like is 
gradually  transformed  by the development  of  our  loving-kindness  and  com­
passion  into an all-pervasive  bodhichitta  that embraces  all beings.
The  Vajrayana  Vehicle  takes  another  approach  to dealing  with  disturbing  
emotions  by actually  taking  the disturbing  emotions  as the path.  Bringing  
disturbing  emotions  onto  the path  means,  for  example,  that  we look  directly  
at the disturbing  emotion  of  anger,  and  by looking  at it directly,  we discover  
that the anger ’s nature  has no true existence. Realizing  that our disturbing  
emotions  are not solid  things  and recognizing  their  fundamental  nature,  
we bring  them  onto the path.  In this approach,  we must  not develop  the 
attitude  “I must  abandon  emotion, ” and we do not get involved  with the 
disturbing  emotions  in the  way  an untrained  person  would.  We neither  view  
disturbing  emotions  as our enemy  nor allow  ourselves  to become  attached  
to, and involved  with,  them.
When  we practice  in this  way, thoughts  will,  of  course,  continue  to arise  
from time to time. The thoughts  that arise can be either  fully manifest,  
which  we call  “coarse  thoughts, ” or an undercurrent  of subtle,  almost  imper ­
ceptible,  thoughts.  Therefore,  the text  continues,  “Allow  the cloudy  water  of 
thought  to clarify  itself. ” When  we have  a glass  of water  with  sediment  in it 
and  we leave  it undisturbed,  the sediment  falls to the bottom  and the water  
becomes  clear  and is no longer  cloudy.  In the same  way,  if we place  our  mind  
at rest, the apparently  cloudy  or obscuring  quality  of  thought  will naturally  
subside  and our awareness  will not be obscured  by thoughts.
The text next  says, “Do not attempt  to stop or create  appearances. Leave 
them  as they  are.” To not attempt  to stop appearances  means that  we don ’t 
try to change  them  in anyway —we don ’t reject  unpleasant  appearances  or 
attempt  to increase  pleasant  ones.  We continue,  of course,  to experience  
these  various  appearances  that we regard  as either  pleasant  or unpleasant.  
Normally,  when  we experience  an external  appearance,  our mind  places140 — TEACHINGS  ON THE GANGES  MAHAMUDRA

HOW  TO PRACTICE  THE MAIN  BODY
greater  importance  on determining  whether  it is pleasant  or unpleasant  
than on seeing  the actual  characteristics  of the apparent  thing  itself.  This  
means  that as long as our mind  is not lost in appearances,  we will not be 
particularly  affected  by them.  We become  affected  by appearances  when  
our mind  is attached  to them,  which  is why  Tilopa  said, “Child,  it is not 
external  appearances  that bind  you but the attachment  to them  that binds  
you. Therefore,  Naropa,  cut through craving. ” Essentially,  this means  that 
whatever  we see, hear, or perceive,  we do not conceptualize  it as good  or 
bad or as inherently  pleasant  or unpleasant.  And  we must  always  remember  
that the root of  pleasure  and pain  is not external  appearances  but our own 
mind.  The text makes  the point  that if you do not accept  or reject  external  
appearances,  all that  appears  and exists  will be liberated  as Mahamudra.
24. The all'basis is unborn,  and within  that unborn  all-basis,  
abandon  bad habits,  wrongdoing,  and obscurations.
Therefore,  do not fixate  or reckon,  but rest in the essence  of  the 
unborn  nature.
In that state,  appearances  are fully  apparent,
And  within  that  vivid  experience, allow  concepts  to be exhausted  or 
dissolve.
“The all-basis  is unborn ” in this verse  refers  to both the primordial  all­
basis and to the present  all-basis,  which  contains  the imprints  of habits. 62 
Since  this is unborn, there  is no solidity  for habits  to rest in.  If this nature  
is directly  perceived,  then we do not have to intentionally  abandon  these  
obscurations  because  their  nature  and the nature of what  they obscure  is 
seen directly;  they do not have to be individually  abandoned.  The term  
all-basis  is used,  for example,  in the Mind-Only tradition,  to refer  to the 
all-basis  consciousness  (Skt. alaya ), which  is the basis  for all of samsara — 
for all impure  phenomena.  Here it is being  used in a different  way, to 
refer to the ground  of everything,  the nature  of phenomena.  And that 
ground  is the absence  of true generation;  it is the unborn quality, which  is 
emptiness.
The next  line, “Therefore, do not fixate  or reckon,  but rest in the essence  
of  the unborn  nature, ” means  that  ifwe  perceive  this nature  directly,  then  we 
don ’t have  to worry  about  whether  we will  be able  to abandon  the disturbing  
emotions.  We do not have  to engage  in thinking,  “Well,  I can abandon  this 
disturbing  emotion  but won ’t be able to abandon  that  disturbing  emotion. ”— Hi

This is because we are working  much  more  directly  by seeing  the nature,  
seeing  what  is beneath  all this. So it is unnecessary  to worry  about  aban ­
doning  the disturbing  emotions.  Instead,  when  disturbing  emotions  arise,  
it is fine; when  they  don ’t arise,  it is also fine because  the true nature  itself  
(the dharmata)  is unchanging  and unaffected  by the presence  or absence  of 
disturbing  emotions.  Rather  than  putting  our attention  into  manipulating  
disturbing  emotions,  we are advised  to put our attention  into just resting  
within  that unborn  and unchanging  nature.
The last line says, “In that state,  appearances  are fully apparent,  and 
within  that vivid  experience,  allow  concepts  to be exhuasted  or dissolve. ” 
This means,  again,  to let what  is experienced  just be without  attempting  
to manipulate  what we hear, see, taste, and feel. We should  allow  these  
thoughts,  which  only  solidify  our experience,  to be exhausted.  This  is much  
the same as what  we said earlier  with regard  to allowing  appearances  to 
be just what  they are. When  we experience  these appearances,  they  will 
be extremely vivid  because  their  vividness  will not be diminished  by the 
involvement  of conceptualization.  Because  there  is no conceptualization  
in Mahamudra,  the projection  that is produced  by concepts  is exhausted.  
Experiencing  our mind  is the root of experience;  by not conceptualizing  
the experience,  we become  free from the fetter  that conceptualization  
produces.
Having  the Resultant  View
25. Complete  liberation  from  all conceptual  extremes is the supreme  
monarch  of  views.
Boundless  vastness  is the supreme  monarch  of meditations.
Being  directionless  and utterly  impartial  is the supreme  monarch  of 
conduct.
Self-liberation  beyond  expectation  is the supreme  result.
This  verse  summarizes  the  view,  meditation,  conduct,  and  fruition  of Maha ­
mudra.  Previously,  in verse  16, we had a four-line  explanation  that said,  “If 
you are beyond  all grasping  at an object  and grasping  at a subject,  that  is the 
monarch  among  all views.  If there  is no distraction,  that it is the monarch  
among  all meditations.  If there  is no effort,  that is the monarch  among  all 
conduct.  When  there  is no hope  and no fear, that is the final  result  and the 
fruition  has been attained. ” Here,  in verse 25, it is slightly  different.  The142 — TEACHINGS  ON THE GANGES  MAHAMUDRA

HOW  TO PRACTICE  THE MAIN  BODY143
reason  these  four lines are mentioned  twice  in the text is that previously  
Tilopa  explained  how  to enter  into the view,  the meditation,  and conduct.  
Here  he explains  how  we actually  are when  we have  become accomplished  
in this meditation  and conduct.
The point  of the first line, “Complete  liberation  from all conceptual  
extremes  is the supreme  monarch  of views, ” is that  the supreme  view  is a view  
without  fixation  on things  as they really  exist  or don ’t exist.  Then  it says,  
“Boundless  vastness is the supreme  monarch  of meditations, ” with  bound ­
less referring  to the same  quality  in our meditation  of cultivating  the view  
that  is beyond  extremes  and  experiencing  this in meditation.  The  boundless  
quality  in the experience  of  vastness,  of total freedom  and a lack of being  
hemmed  in, is similar  to the liberation  from  conceptual  extremes. The  next  
line, “Being  directionless  and utterly  impartial  is the supreme  monarch  of 
conduct, ” refers  to the same  idea that our conduct  will be totally  beyond  
the expectations  of existence  and nonexistence.  The result  is the discovery  
of what  abides  within  ourselves  as distinct  from hoping  for a particular  
outcome  in the future.  The final  line is “Self-liberation  beyond  expectation  
is the supreme  result. ” What  is meant  by self-liberation  beyond  hope or 
expectation  is that self-liberation  consists  of the direct  recognition  of the 
single  nature  of all things.  Therefore, there  is no hope  for liberation  since  it 
is recognized  that things  are self-liberating.
This  is an explanation  of the view,  meditation,  conduct,  and result  from  
the point  of  view  of  a practitioner  of  the highest  faculties  and is an explana ­
tion  that  applies  to the  practice  of  someone  who  is said  to have  simultaneous  
realization  and liberation.  A person  with these  highest  faculties  does not 
really  have  to pass through  different  stages  of  practice.  The other  two types  
of practitioners —those  of  average  and  those  of lesser  faculties —have  to pass 
through  a certain  number  of  stages  of  practice  to come  to this realization.
The Practice  for  Those  of Medium  or Lesser  
Faculties
16. For a beginner,  it is like a fast current  running  through  a narrow  
ravine.
In the middle,  or after  that,  it becomes  like the gentle  current  of the 
Ganges River.
In the end, it is like the flowing  of  all rivers  into the mother  ocean.
Or, it is like the meeting  of the mother  and child  of all the rivers.

This verse  explains  the practice  for the practitioner  who hasn ’t developed  
high realization.  In this verse,  Tilopa  describes  the experiences  of practi ­
tioners  at three  levels:  those  starting  to practice  meditation,  those  expe ­
rienced  in meditation  practice,  and those  who have realized  meditation  
practice.  The  analogies  given  are applicable  to both  the practice  of  Shamatha  
and  Vipashyana  and  the union  of  Shamatha  and  Vipashyana.  When  we first 
begin  to cultivate  samadhi  (meditative absorption),  there  is a great  fluctua ­
tion in our experience.  The text says,  “For a beginner,  it is like a fast current  
running  through  a narrow  ravine. ” This means  that  when  someone  starts  
to practice  meditation —whether  it is Tranquillity  or Insight  meditation — 
there is not much  stillness  in their mind.  They  have an experience  of a 
great  deal of agitation  and a great  deal of speed  in their  meditation.  There  
might  be moments  of stillness,  but these  will probably  be followed  by an 
even stronger  upsurge  of thoughts.  This is explained  in all commentaries  
on meditation  as being  an experience  in which  the beginner  will think  that 
there  are more  thoughts  arising  in their  mind  than before  they  practiced  
meditation.  In fact, what has happened  is that the meditation  technique  
provides  enough  space  so that they  actually  become  aware  for the first time  
of  how  many  thoughts  have  been  in their  mind  all the time.  So it is not really  
that  there  are more  thoughts,  but nevertheless  it will seem  to that  person  as 
though  there  are.
Next,  the text says, “In the  middle, or after  that,  it becomes  like the gen­
tle current  of the Ganges  River. ” The Ganges  River  in India  does not have  
huge  waves  or much  turbulence,  but it does  have  a current  and it is moving.  
So when  someone  has become  practiced  in meditation,  their mind is not 
completely  still—they have more  or less a constant  flow of thought —but 
these  thoughts  are experienced without  the turbulence  and uncontrolled  
speed  that  they  had earlier.
Finally,  the last line,  “In the end,  it is like  the flowing  of  all rivers  into the 
mother  ocean,  or it is like the meeting  of the mother  and  child  of  all the riv­
ers,” refers  to a point  in practice  where  from  the point  of  view  of  Shamatha,  
there  is such  stillness  in the mind  that it has become immovable.  From  the 
point  of view  of  Vipashyana,  there  is a clarity  that is more or less constant  
because  it is not obscured  by any kind  of agitation  in this stillness.
17. If those  of little  intelligence  find they  cannot  remain  in that  state,
They  may  apply  the technique  of  breathing  and emphasize  the 
essence  of awareness.144 — TEACHINGS  ON THE GANGES  MAHAMUDRA

HOW  TO PRACTICE  THE MAIN  BODY 145
Through  many  techniques  such  as gaze  and holding  the mind,  
Tighten  your  awareness  until  it stays  put,
Exerting  effort  until  awareness  comes  to rest in its nature.
Verse  27 begins  with  “those  of  little  intelligence, ” which  refers  to people  
who  are inferior  to practitioners  of the highest  capabilities  who  do not need  
any other  techniques.  When  persons  of average  faculties  start to practice  
meditation,  sometimes  their  mind  is clear  and  sometimes  it is not,  sometimes  
it is stable and sometimes  it is not. As a result,  they  have  to go through  the 
process  of  gradually  increasing  the lucidity  and  stability  of  their  meditation.  
The  second  line  refers  to instructions  that  are traditional  among  the siddhas  
of  our  lineage  used  to cultivate  samadhi —the methods  of  middle  breathing,  
vase breathing,  and the  threefold  gentle  breath.  The fourth  line tells us to 
tighten  our  awareness  until  it stays  put.  This  line  suggests  that  we should  put 
our energy  into tightening  our awareness.  It is true that if a person  s aware ­
ness  is too tightly  adjusted  and  controlled,  it needs  to be loosened.  Generally  
speaking,  this is not a problem;  rather,  we usually  have  too little  lucidity  and 
too little  stability  in samadhi  and need,  therefore,  to exert more  energy  in 
maintaining  awareness  so that  we have  enough  attention  to notice  what  is 
happening  in our meditation  and correct  any defects.  Thus,  it is necessary  
to engage  in techniques  that will allow  our mindfulness  and attentiveness  
to become  stable.  There  are various  techniques  given  for the practice  of  Sha-  
matha  and Vipashyana  when  our mind will not simply  remain  at rest. If 
our mind  will not remain  at rest, then  it causes  too much  fluctuation  in the 
clarity  of Vipashyana  meditation  and  we cannot  maintain a steady  clarity.  
This  is a common  experience  for beginners  who  have  glimpses  of  the nature  
of their  mind  through  meditation  practice  but find  that these  glimpses  are 
immediately  followed  by some  kind  of distraction.  In the case of extraordi ­
nary  teachers  dealing  with  extraordinary  students,  it may be sufficient  for 
the teacher  to simply  point  out the nature  of  the mind  directly  to the student  
and then  the student  will  be able  to rest  within  that  and  progress.  But  often,  
even  though  the student  may  have  had  some  kind  of  recognition  at the time  
of the pointing-out  instruction,  it is likely  to be fragile  and unstable  and 
dependent  upon  the teacher  s presence.  In this  case,  it may  be necessary  to use 
a supportive  technique,  and these  techniques  are generally  used  to increase  
both  the tranquillity  of the mind  and the luminous  clarity  of insight.
The first  of these  are the breathing  techniques  that  we have  already  men ­
tioned.  We can follow  the breath  by counting  the breath,  for example,  as is

taught  in the Ninth  Karmapa ’s Pointing  Out the Dharmakaya , where  we 
count  each  breath  as it passes  out of  our nostrils.  Or we can hold  the breath  
in the technique  called  “vajra  repetition, ” in which  we even the length  of 
the breath  so that the period  of  inhalation,  the period  of retention,  and the 
period  of exhalation  are all of the same  duration.  We can also accompany  
the inhalation  with  the sound  OM, the retention  with the sound  AH, and 
the exhalation  with  the sound  hung . These  can be coordinated  in other  
ways  because  the actual  coordination  varies  with  each  tradition.  Or we can 
use a more  forceful  technique  called  “vase  breathing, ” in which  the air that 
has been  inhaled  is forcefully  retained  below  the navel.  The function  of all 
of these  breathing  techniques  is to allow  the practitioner  s mind  to come  to 
rest and thereby  promote  the clarity  of insight.
When  this verse  mentions  that we should  exert  effort  “until  awareness  
comes  to rest in its nature, ” awareness  refers  to the dual  faculty  of  mindful ­
ness and alertness,  which,  as we saw before  in the quote  from  Tashi  Nam-  
gyal, needs  to be sharp  and clear  for the Mahamudra  practitioner.  It may 
be helpful,  therefore,  to intentionally  sharpen  our awareness  for very  brief  
periods  of time,  perhaps  a minute or two, within  a longer  meditation  ses­
sion.  The reason  this may be helpful  is that if we can cultivate  the faculty  
of sharp  mindfulness  and alertness,  then  we will be free from  distraction  
because  whenever  we lose mindfulness,  we immediately  become  distracted.
This verse  also mentions  the use of gaze and  ways  of holding  the mind.  
There  are, of course,  many  defects  that can occur  in meditation,  and there  
are different  ways to enumerate  them,  such as the five defects  of samadhi,  
and so on. To help  practitioners  recognize  these  defects  when  they occur  
and recognize  when  to apply  remedies  to them,  we can sum  up these  defects  
as being  of two major  types —namely,  torpor  and agitation.  Torpor  (Tib.  
mukpa ) is a state  of mind  in which  we feel sleepy,  dull, or devoid  of mental  
clarity.  Agitation  (Tib.  gopa)  is a state in which  our mind  is wild,  excited,  
and  all over  the place.  We need  to prevent  these  two defects.  The  first  remedy  
is to use the gaze:  When  torpor  arises,  we raise  our  gaze,  looking  upward  and 
also opening  our eyes fairly  wide.  On the other  hand,  when  we are agitated  
in our meditation,  we lower  the gaze  and keep  our eyes half-closed.
Another  technique  for steadying  the mind  is visualization.  If  we feel tor­
por,  we can  visualize  a drop,  or sphere  (Tib.  tigle),  of white  light  and  visualize  
it rising  up through  our body to the top of our head  and then  we hold  our 
attention  on this drop.  If we are afflicted  with  excitement  in our  meditation,  
we can visualize  a drop of black  light that descends  into our meditation146 — TEACHINGS  ON THE GANGES  MAHAMUDRA

HOW  TO PRACTICE  THE MAIN  BODY H7
cushion  and hold  our mind  on that. Other  ways  of dealing  with torpor  is 
to recollect  the qualities  of the Buddha  or of bodhisattvas,  the benefits  of 
Mahamudra,  and so forth.  When  we are afflicted  by agitation,  we should  
recollect  the defects  of  samsara,  contemplate  impermanence,  and  so on. All 
of  these  techniques  are applied  as needed  at the discretion  of  the  practitioner  
based  upon  what  is happening  in his or her practice.  And  what  we are doing  
here is, as the text says, exerting  tension  or effort  until  awareness  comes  to 
rest in that  state  or in its nature.
28. If  you rely upon  karmamudra,  the wisdom  of  bliss and emptiness  
will arise.
Enter  into the union,  having  consecrated  the upaya  and the prajna .63
Slowly  send  it down,  coil it, turn  it back,  and lead it to its proper  
place.
Finally  cause  it to pervade  your  whole  body.
If  there  is no attachment  or craving, the wisdom  of bliss and 
emptiness  will appear.
Generally  speaking,  Karmamudra  practice  refers  to taking  desire  as the 
path.  Although  this can be helpful  for one or two very  extraordinary  indi­
viduals  in each  generation,  most  people  who  have  attempted  to do this prac­
tice  have  merely  increased  their  disturbing  emotions. 64 While  this  practice  is 
taught  for exactly  the opposite  purpose,  nevertheless,  this seems  to be what  
happens.  So in the Kagyu  lineage,  we tend  to replace  Karmamudra  practice  
with  inner  heat (Tib.  tummo)  practice.
Karmamudra  describes  a method  that can be used to enhance  the 
practice  of Mahamudra.  This practice  is for a practitioner  who has a sta­
ble practice  but who has not been able to achieve  the intense  wisdom  of 
Mahamudra.  The text  says, “If you rely upon  karmamudra,  the wisdom  of 
bliss and emptiness  will arise. ” This is a supplementary  technique  used to 
enhance  or intensify  the wisdom  of Mahamudra.  This technique,  called  
“Karmamudra ” or the “Action  Seal, ” has two styles  of  practice.  One  is called  
the “upper  door ” or “upper  gate ” and the other  is called  the “lower  door ” 
or “lower  gate. ” The lower  door,  which  involves  physical  sexual  relations,  
is a very risky  way to achieve  enlightenment,  so only  a few great  yogis  and 
yogins  do it; most  do not.  What  is more  commonly  practiced  is the upper-  
door  style of Karmamudra  practice,  from  which  is derived  the practice  of 
tummo , as found,  for example,  in the  Six Dharmas  of  Naropa.  Essentially,

this technique  involves  using  the subtle  channels,  winds,  and drops  within  
the physical  body  to allow  the wisdom  of bliss and emptiness  to arise.  In 
normal  Mahamudra  practice,  the unity  of luminous  clarity  and emptiness  
arises.  In the Karmamudra  practice,  that same  wisdom  arises  in a slightly  
different  way. Instead  of this wisdom  being  primarily  the unity  of lucidity  
and emptiness,  it arises  primarily  as the unity  of  bliss  and emptiness.  Essen ­
tially,  what  occurs  is that physical  bliss arises  in the body,  and when  the 
practitioner  looks  at the nature  of that bliss,  which  is emptiness,  he or she 
will experience,  or realize,  the unity  of  bliss  and emptiness.
In more  detail,  through  the correct  application  of the subtle  channels,  
winds,  and drops  within  the subtle  body,  one can generate  a special  type  
of warmth  or heat. This warmth  produces  a sensation  of bliss. This bliss 
becomes  the basis for the experience  of emptiness. The technique  involves  
visualization,  such as visualizing  subtle  drops  dripping  down  from  the syl­
lable  ham , which  is visualized  in the top of the head,  and of  the inner  heat 
(tummo ) blazing  up from  the ah stroke  visualized  just  below  the navel.  This 
is described  in Tilopas  song  when  it says, “Send it down,  coil it, turn it 
back,  and lead it to its proper  place. ” The details  of  how  to actually  do this 
particular  practice  are normally  taught in  long  retreat  sessions  such as the 
three-year  retreat.  What  is of  utmost  importance  in either  the upper-  or the 
lower-door  version  of this Karmamudra  practice  is that there  be no craving  
for the bliss and no attachment  to it. The purpose,  of course,  is to use the 
bliss  as a basis  for the realization  of  emptiness.  So ifthere  is no attachment  to 
the bliss,  then  one will  see the emptiness  of it, as the text says,  “The  wisdom  
of  bliss and emptiness  will arise. ”
The Results  of the Practice  of Mahamudra
Z9. You  will  possess  longevity  without  white  hair,  and you will be as 
healthy  as the waxing  moon.
Your  complexion  will be lustrous,  and you will be as powerful  as a 
lion.
You  will quickly  attain  the common  siddhis, and you will come  to 
attain  the supreme  siddhi  as well.
Generally  speaking,  there  are two results  that come  from the practice  of 
Mahamudra.  The first is called  “the uncommon  or supreme  siddhi ” and 
the second  is called  “the common  or ordinary  siddhi. ” A siddhi  is a spiritual148 — TEACHINGS  ON THE GANGES  MAHAMUDRA

HOW  TO PRACTICE  THE MAIN  BODY 149
attainment.  The supreme  siddhi  is achieved  through  the samadhi  of  Maha-  
mudra  when  all that can be abandoned  (the disturbing  emotions  and so 
forth)  is pacified.  The  pacification  of  all that  should  be abandoned  results  in 
the two  wisdoms:  the wisdom  of  the variety  of phenomena  and the wisdom  
of how  phenomena  really  are. That is the supreme  siddhi,  also called  “the 
ultimate  result. ”
A common  siddhi  that  results  from  the practice  of  Mahamudra  is a state  
of mind  that is supremely  peaceful  and placid.  Normally,  our mind  is any­
thing  but peaceful;  we are afflicted  by our thoughts,  afflicted  by the fact 
that although  some  thoughts  are pleasant, most  are unpleasant,  and this all 
results  in agitation  and worry.  This agitation  and  worry  can actually  get to 
the point  of  making  us physically  uncomfortable  and finally  physically  sick 
because  of their  negative  influence  on the subtle  channels  and winds. This  
agitation  and worry  also makes  us age more  quickly  and makes  us more  
susceptible  to becoming  ill. The  samadhi  of  Mahamudra  produces  a state  of 
mental  peace,  mental  bliss,  and  comfort,  and  therefore  places  us in a state  of 
physical comfort  and health  that  will cause  us to have  a long  life “without  
white  hair, ” a complexion that is “lustrous, ” and strength  “as powerful  as a 
lion. ”
The actual  words  in this verse  are fairly  clear,  but we need  to understand  
that there is often a hidden  meaning  in the sentence,  “You will quickly  
attain  the common  siddhis,  and  you  will  come  to attain  the supreme  siddhi  
as well. ” The  literal  meaning  is that,  through  the realization  of  Mahamudra,  
your  channels  and  winds  become  straightened  so the  vital  energy  flows  more  
easily  and, as a result,  you become  healthy,  so that  you will have  a long  life 
with great  health.  The hidden  meaning  is that the unchanging  longevity  
that is free of the signs  of aging,  such  as white  hair, refers  to the unchang ­
ing realization  of Vajradhara.  The phrase  “healthy  as the waxing  moon ” 
refers  to the fully  expanded  wisdom  of Mahamudra. Wisdom  in this case 
is intelligence,  or prajna,  which  can be the insight  that  comes  from  hearing,  
contemplating,  or meditating  but here it refers  to the wisdom  that comes  
from  meditating —specifically,  the realization  of the true nature  through  
Mahamudra  practice.  This wisdom  will be stable  and luminous  or as it 
says, “You will be as powerful  as a lion, ” meaning  that you will  possess  the 
uncommon  qualities  of a buddha,  such as the ten powers, 65 the fourfold  
fearlessness, 66 and so on.

Dedication  and  Aspiration
The text ends with the dedication  and aspiration,  which  consists  of only  
two lines:
These  instructions  of the essential  point  of  Mahamudra,  may  they  
abide  in the hearts  of fortunate  beings.
May  these  essential  instructions  in Mahamudra  abide  in the hearts  
of  worthy  beings.
These  last two lines  are an aspiration  that  all beings  will be able to practice  
this teaching  and that they  will have access  to the Mahamudra  instruc ­
tions  and  keep  these  instructions  in their  hearts.  In other  words,  the aspira ­
tion is that these  instructions  will actually  be imbibed  and understood  by 
those  who  are going  to practice  them.  When  Tilopa  mentions  “the essential  
instructions  of Mahamudra, ” he means  that he has presented  the central  
essence  and technique  of  all Mahamudra  practice  in this doha.
This completes  the vajra words  of Mahamudra  spoken  by Tilopa.  
Naropa  underwent  what  are called  the “twelve  minor  austerities ” while  
looking  for Tilopa,  and then,  after  he found  him, he underwent  twelve  
even greater  hardships  or austerities.  Tilopa  taught  this spiritual  song  
to Naropa on the Ganges  River  after the last of Naropa  s twelve  greater  
hardships.
Colophon
This was bestowed  on the banks  of the Ganges  River  by the great  and glo­
rious siddha  Tilopa,  who had realized  Mahamudra,  upon the Kashmiri  
pandit  Naropa,  who was both  learned  and realized,  after he had engaged  
in twelve  hardships  or austerities.  This  was translated  and  written  down  at 
Pullahari  in the north  by the great  Naropa  and the great  Tibetan  translator,  
the king  among  translators, Marpa  Chokyi  Lodro.
Note by Thrangu  Rinpoche
There  are different  editions  of this text, 67 which  differ  mostly  in the order  
of the verses.  There  are two principal  editions,  and I used  the one titled  The150 — TEACHINGS  ON THE GANGES  MAHAMUDRA

HOW  TO PRACTICE  THE MAIN  BODY
Collected  Works  of Lord  Pema  Karpo.  I also used The Topical  Analysis  of 
Lord  Rangjung  Dorje,  the Third  Karmapa,  for my commentary.
Questions
Question:  It is taught  that  we should  not fixate  on achieving  any  particular  
end in Mahamudra.  But  when  the Buddha  sat under  the bodhi  tree,  he said 
that  he definitely  would  not get up until  he had achieved  enlightenment.
Rinpoche:  Generally  speaking,  any aspect  of the view, meditation,  and 
conduct  in Buddhism  has two aspects.  There  is the conventional  level of 
reality, which  is how things  appear  to us, and the ultimate  level  of reality,  
which  is how things  really  are. These  two levels  are true for any level of 
the teaching —the shravaka  approach  of view, meditation,  and conduct;  
the bodhisattva  approach  of the Mahayana;  and the Vajrayana  approach  
of Mahamudra  and Dzogchen.  When  we say, “Have  no hope  or fear of an 
outcome, ” this is an explanation  of how to experience ultimate  reality  and 
not  relative  reality.  This  is not unique  to Vajrayana  because  even  in the Foun ­
dation  path  we have  teachings  that  there  is no personal  self  on the ultimate  
level  and  therefore  there  is nothing  to be abandoned,  nothing  to be realized,  
and  so forth.  In the Mahayana,  there  also  is nothing  to be abandoned,  noth ­
ing to be realized,  and so forth.
The explanation  in the Ganges  Mahamudra  that says that  we should  not 
have any particular  goal is from  the point  of  view  of the mind  s nature  and 
this is from  the view  of  ultimate  reality.  However,  in the context  of conven ­
tional  reality,  each one of these  paths  would  have their  own fruition.  For 
example,  in the shravaka  path,  there  is the attainment  of an arhat;  in the 
Mahayana  path, there  is the attainment  of the bodhisattva  levels  and bud-  
dhahood;  and in the Mahamudra  path,  there  is the attainment  of supreme  
siddhi,  or buddhahood.
So, the Buddha,  in his realization,  sat under  the bodhi  tree  at Bodh  Gaya  
and  said,  “My  body  may  dry  up, my bones  and  flesh  rot, but I shall  not move  
from  this seat until  I achieve  the very  essence  of  awakening. ”
Question:  One of the spiritual  songs  of Jamgon  Kongtrul  Lodro  Thaye  
described  Mahamudra  as “simplicity,  one taste. ” Is that  the same  as the non­
meditation  referred  to here?- 151

Rinpoche:  No, in The Spiritual  SongofLodro  lhaye  to which  you are refer ­
ring,  Jamgon  Kongtrul  is discussing  the stages  of the practice  of Maha-  
mudra  meditation.  There  are four stages  of Mahamudra  experience  and 
realization  that are usually  described  as: one-pointedness,  beyond  elabora ­
tion,  one taste,  and nonmeditation.  Each  of these  is a stage  along  the path.  
Nonmeditation  in this context  refers  to a certain  level  of Mahamudra  real­
ization.  The instruction  in the Ganges  Mahamudra  is that one should  not 
intellectualize  and  conceptualize  our  meditation.  This  is an instruction  that 
is to be applied  from  the very  beginning  of meditation  and is therefore  not 
equivalent  to the nonmeditation  in the fourth  stage  of Mahamudra.  Our 
biggest  problem  in the practice  of  Mahamudra  is that  we want  things  to go 
well—we want  meditation  to be very  elegant  and to know  exactly  what  we 
want  it to be. In trying  to program  our meditation  in this way,  we create  the 
circumstances  for our own disappointment  and it causes  us to think,  “Oh, 
it is not going  well. ” These  expectations  are among  what  is to be renounced.  
What  is intended  by these  instructions  is to simply  rest in direct  and naked  
awareness.
Question:  It seems  to me that this state of meditation  is the ground  of 
Mahamudra  and then  we have to go on the path.  Is it quite  reasonable  that 
we can also remember  what  the path  is when  we are practicing?  For  example,  
when  I receive  the teachings  on the essence  of  nonmeditation,  I can receive 
it only  in a conceptual  way and do not have  the direct  experience  of  it.
Rinpoche:  Concepts  can be used  right  now;  ail of  this can be applied  right  
now.  From  the point  of  view  of the lower  vehicles,  of course,  there  is a long  
sequential  arrangement  of practice  and the path is seen as very long. But 
in Mahamudra  the path consists  of looking  at your  own mind,  and there  
should  be no great  difficulty  in looking  at your  own mind  because  it is your  
own mind.  This means  not pretending  that something  that is not empty  
is empty,  that something  that does not appear  to be empty  is empty,  that 
something  that does not appear  to be lucid  is lucid.  It has nothing  to do 
with  programming  or convincing  yourself  of anything.  Of  course, it is true 
that as beginners  we have  obscurations  that  we have  to deal  with,  yet these  
can definitely  be dispelled  by our faith and diligence,  and there  is no real 
difficulty  in this.  Whether  we consider  it the blessing  of  the Kagyu  gurus  or 
our own faith  and devotion,  if we have  trust  in the validity  of this process,  
it will definitely  occur.152 — TEACHINGS  ON THE GANGES  MAHAMUDRA

HOW  TO PRACTICE  THE MAIN  BODY153
Question:  Rinpoche,  I wonder  if you would  talk a little more  about  Sha- 
matha  Mahamudra.  It sounds  like the enemy  of dullness  happens  without  
us knowing  it is already there.  I know  that clarity  is present,  but I am not 
sure if I know  what  the distinction  is. If someone  is sitting  and the percep ­
tion is vivid  and there  isn’t much  thought,  is that  an indication  that clarity  
or dullness  is present?
Rinpoche:  Luminous  clarity  is present  in Mahamudra  meditation,  and it 
is the absence  of the defect  of torpor  and is the unimpeded experience  of 
appearances,  but it is also the certainty  of a direct  recognition  of the mind ’s 
nature.  It refers  to the certainty  that there  is a distinct  and clear  experience  
of the mind ’s nature.  In general,  what  is said to be most  necessary for the 
practice  of Mahamudra,  for example,  in The  Moonbeams  of Mahamudra  by 
Tashi  Namgyal,  is the two faculties  of mindfulness  and attentiveness.  This  
text says that there  should  be as much  of these two qualities  as possible;  
the more  mindfulness  and attentiveness,  the better,  and we should  never  
be apart  from  these  in our meditation  practice  for even an instant.  In fact,  
mindfulness  and attentiveness  have to be so clear  that they have almost  a 
hard  edge  to their  lucidity.  Without  that crisp  clarity,  it will become  vague  
and dark,  which  is called  “torpor. ”
Question:  Rinpoche  explained  that  the intellectual  mind  is a direct  obsta ­
cle to the realization  of the true nature  of our own mind.  Does  this mean  
that if I study  Buddhist  knowledge, I increase  the obstacles?
Rinpoche:  No. There  are two  situations  with  regard  to the use of conceptual  
thought  in the Dharmic  sense.  When  I said that the conceptual  or intel ­
lectual  attitude  could  be an obstacle,  I was referring  to one situation  and 
not to the other.  Generally  speaking,  to study  Dharma  and  various  areas  of 
knowledge  a great  deal is not only  not an obstacle  to the  practice  and real­
ization  of Mahamudra  but it also is of great  assistance to us. However,  it is 
an obstacle if you think  about  all that  you have  been  reading  while  you are 
meditating.  This  becomes  an obstacle  because  you might  make  the mistake  
of thinking  that  you can figure out the nature  of mind  by using  inferential  
reasoning.  Mahamudra  is not a practice  involving  trying  to figure  this out. 
Mahamudra  is allowing  direct  experience  of this nature  to occur.  So, aside  
from  that  particular  mistake  in meditation,  studying  certainly  can stabilize  
and enhance  the practice  of Mahamudra  and definitely  will not hurt  it.

Afterword
You have  all come  here out of a great  interest  in the Dharma  and especially  
out of devotion  for the profound  Dharma  of Mahamudra.  With  that as 
your  motivation,  you have come  here and listened  to this explanation  and 
asked  questions  about  what  was unclear  to you, and all of this is delightful  
to me. I feel very  fortunate  to have  had the opportunity  to take  part  in this. 
Whereas  I myself  have  no real ability  to benefit  you under  my own  power,  
nevertheless, these  words  of the mahasiddha  Tilopa  are utterly  reliable  and 
free of error.  So I am certain  that there  is great  benefit  in this, especially  
since  you are committed  practitioners  of meditation  who  have  undertaken  
this practice  and are attempting to bring  it to its fruition.  So I delight  in 
what  we have  done  here and have  enjoyed  it very  much,  and I thank  you all 
for making  it possible.

Appendix  A: Tilopas  Six Points  
for  Mahamudra
(Tib.  gNad  kyigzer  drug , pronounced  Ndkyi  zerdruk )
Tilopas  famous  six instructions  on what  to do in Mahamudra  meditation  
were taken  from a spiritual  song  that he sang to Naropa.  The full text of 
that song  is given  below,  following  Thrangu  Rinpoche ’s commentary  on 
the six instructions.
mi no 
mi sdm 
mi sem 
migom  
mijo
rangsarzhagDon ’t recall  [the  past].
Don ’t anticipate  [the future].  
Don ’t think  [about  the present].  
Don ’t meditate  [on something].  
Don ’t analyze  [your  actions].  
Just rest naturally.
Thrangu  Rinpoche ’s Commentary
“Don ’t recall ” means  that  we don ’t make  any attempt  to think  about  what  
went  on in the past. “Don ’t anticipate ” means  that  we don ’t reflect  on what  
may happen  in the future.  “Don ’t think ” means  that we don ’t reflect  on 
what  is happening  now.  In short,  we completely  let go of  thoughts  that  have  
anything to do with the past, present,  and future.  “Don ’t meditate ” may 
seem  like a contradiction.  Here  we are, sitting  down  and trying  to develop  
an understanding  of  Mahamudra,  and  Tilopa  says,  “Don ’t meditate. ” What  
he means  in this  context  is that  if we approach  the meditation  session  think ­
ing “Now  I’m going  to meditate  on this, and I’m going  to work  at it,” this 
determined  approach  won ’t work  or produce  very  good  results.  We have  to 
make  sure that  this instruction  “Don ’t meditate ” is not interpreted  to mean

158 — APPENDIX  A
chat  we don ’t have to do any meditation  and  just be. Rather  these  instruc ­
tions  are for  when  we are already  in a meditation  session,  actually  cultivating  
the understanding  of Mahamudra,  and these  instructions  tell us to place  
the mind  in such a way that we are not trying  to do anything.  This is the 
actual  practice  of  meditation;  this is the cultivation  of  the understanding  of 
Mahamudra.  “Don ’t examine  or act” means  don ’t examine  your  meditation  
session  by trying  to see if meditation  is just like this or that and try to get 
into the inner  workings  of  meditation.
So these are the first five instructions.  Instead  [of doing  any of these  
things],  we should  just rest naturally  in our meditation,  and that ’s the sixth  
point.  Tilopa ’s instructions  on how to maintain  meditation  in the under ­
standing  of Mahamudra  were taken  from  a spiritual  song that he sang  to 
Naropa.  This is what  songs  of realization  are like; they don ’t go into long  
explanations  but  just  go straight  to the point.  Don ’t recall,  don ’t anticipate,  
don ’t think,  don ’t meditate,  don ’t examine,  rest naturally.  That ’s it.
The Doha  Treasure
In Sanskrit:  Doha-kosha-nama  
In Tibetan:  Do ha mdzod  ces bya-ba
I pay homage  to Shri  Vajrasattva.
I pay homage  to unchanging  self-knowing  Mahamudra.
The skandhas,  dhatus  and ayatanas, 68
Without  exception, appear  from  and merge  back  into the nature  of 
Mahamudra.
Freedom  from  the conceptualization  of things  and nothing.
Nonactivity  in the mind,  should  not be mistaken  as the meaning.
Within  the nature  of everything  being  unreal,
Beginning  is eliminated  and end is eliminated.
Whatever  becomes  the perception  of the mind  is not the true nature;
It is a subjective  naming.
The true nature  is not created  by the guru  or by the pupil;
Without  realizing  it as mind  or nonmind,

tilopa ’s six points  for MAHAMUDRA  — 159
Know  it to be the one that  eliminates  the many;
If there  is attachment  to the one, that  alone  will cause  bondage.
I, Telo,  have nothing  to teach.
The place  is not solitary;  it isn’t not solitary.
The eyes are not open;  they  are not closed.
The mind  is not contrived,  it is not uncontrived.
Know  that there  is nothing  to be done  in the natural  mind,
Realize  that  incidental  experiences,  memories, and  knowledge  are unreal.  
And  let them  go where  they  like.
In the dharmata,  which  is free from  conceptualization,
There  is no decrease  or increase, attainment  or loss,  whatsoever.
Do not rely on earnest  asceticism in the forest!
Through  washing  and cleanliness,  you will not find  happiness!
Even  though  you make  offerings  to deities,  you will not attain  liberation!  
Know  the free openness  that has no adoption  or rejection!
One ’s own  true nature  is the result.
Simultaneous  realization  and attainment  do not depend  on a path.
The ignorant  world  searches  elsewhere;
But bliss is having  cut through  dependence  on hope  and fear.
Whenever  the mind ’s grasping  to a self  ceases,
The appearances  of dualism  completely  cease.
Don ’t think!  Don ’t contemplate!
Don ’t examine and analyze!
Don ’t meditate!  Don ’t act! Don ’t have  hope  and fear!
Spontaneously  liberate  the composite  mind  that  grasps  at that.
By this,  come  to the primordial  dharmata.
This  completes  The  Doha  Treasure  composed  by the lord of  yogins Tailopa  
[Tilopa].
It was translated  on his own  by the Indian  Pandita  Vairochana[rakshita]. 69

Appendix  B: The Five Buddha  Families
The five buddha  families  are basic  types  of  energies  that can be experienced  
in meditation  and they  are referred  to in many  tantric  practices.  These  ener­
gies are not simply  cultural  representations  because  anyone,  whether  Bud ­
dhist  or not, can, for example,  train  in the Nyingma  practice  of sky gazing  
and will see these  families  in a mandala.
Buddha  Vairochana  is of  the buddha  family,  and  he is white  in color  and 
resides  in the center  of  the mandala.  He represents  the element  space  and  the 
purification  of the disturbing  emotion  of ignorance,  which,  when  purified,  
becomes  the dharmadhatu  wisdom.  The  disturbing  emotion  of  ignorance  is 
failing  to recognize  what  is wholesome  and unwholesome, failing  to know  
the ultimate  and conventional  truth,  and  failing  to realize  the true nature  
of phenomena.  For example,  it is only out of ignorance  that we become  
angry  and  act aggressively  toward  others  because  we are ignorant  that anger  
will bring  only  pain and suffering  to ourselves  and others.  Elimination  of 
the darkness  of ignorance  is the realization  of the wisdom  of Buddha  Vai­
rochana;  when  our ignorance  is overcome,  it is the wisdom  of dharmata.  
Purification  of ignorance  engenders  realization  of the wisdom  that  sees the 
true nature  of  phenomena.
Buddha  Akshobhya  is of the vajra family,  and he is blue in color  and 
resides  in the east of the mandala.  He represents  the element  water  and 
the purification  of the disturbing  emotion  of anger,  which,  when  purified,  
becomes  the mirrorlike  wisdom.  With the mirrorlike  wisdom,  there  is no 
distinction  between  self  and outer  phenomena  so everything  is experienced  
in unity  and  harmony.  It is called  “the mirrorlike  wisdom ” because  phenom ­
ena then appear  to the mind  in the same  way that things  appear  in a clean  
mirror —completely  accurately  and  with  no distortion.  Understanding  and 
realizing  mirrorlike  wisdom  can take  place  only  with  the elimination  of  the 
negative  emotion  of anger.

162 APPENDIX  B
Buddha  Ratnasambhava is of the  jewel  family,  and he is yellow  in color  
and resides  in the south  of the mandala.  He represents  the element  earth  
and the purification  of  the disturbing  emotion  of  pride,  which,  when  puri­
fied, becomes  the wisdom  of equality.  As soon  as we are born,  we develop  a 
belief  in self  or ego, and  we think,  “I am separate  from  others. ” This  feeling  
of  separation  leads  to pride  because  we begin  to think  that  we are superior  
to others.  As long  as we hold  on to this belief,  we will never  be able to learn  
from  others.  To purify  our pride  and develop  the wisdom  of equality,  we 
must  give up our ego-clinging.  When  we are free from  pride,  the wisdom  
of equality  that is associated  with  Buddha  Ratnasambhava  begins  to arise.
Buddha  Amitabha  is of  the lotus  family,  and he is red in color  and  resides  
in the west  of the mandala.  He represents  the element  fire and the purifi ­
cation  of the disturbing  emotion  of desire,  which,  when  purified,  becomes  
the discriminating  wisdom.  With  the discriminating  wisdom,  or the reali­
zation  of  Buddha  Amitabha,  there  is no attachment  and  desire  and thus  no 
dissatisfaction  or craving  for more  and better  things.  This realization  is so 
powerful  that all things  are naturally  magnetized  as our own,  creating  no 
energy  or force,  as in a state  of  desire.
Buddha  Amoghasiddhi  is of the karma  family,  and he is green  in color  
and resides  in the north  of the mandala.  He represents  the element  air and 
the purification  of  the disturbing  emotion  of jealousy,  which,  when  purified,  
becomes  the all-accomplishing  wisdom.  Jealousy  prevents  us from  accom ­
plishing  our own well-being,  and as a result  we experience  more  suffering  
and continue  to develop  further  jealousy  toward  those  who  have  more.  This 
is the reason  why  the all-accomplishing  wisdom  is experienced  in the absence  
of  jealousy,  and when  jealousy  is removed,  all our wishes are naturally  and 
effortlessly  accomplished.  As long  as jealousy determines  our attitude,  we 
are bound  to experience  more  obstacles  in achieving  personal  success  and in 
accomplishing  positive  goals.  This  is why  Buddha  Amoghasiddhi  s activity  
is wrathful.  It is by decisively  cutting  them  off  that  he removes  all obstacles  
and  hindrances  preventing  spiritual  maturation  and success.  He is green  in 
color,  the same  color  as growing  plants,  symbolizing  the numerous  activities  
that he employs  to remove  hindrances.

Appendix  C: The Eight  Consciousnesses
The Five Sensory  Consciousnesses
The five sensory  consciousnesses  perceive  the five sense objects  of visual  
forms,  sounds,  tastes,  smells,  and bodily  sensations.  The five sense  objects  
are neither  good nor bad, but some are perceived  as being  good  and are 
accepted,  and some  are perceived  as bad and are rejected.  These  perceptions  
of pleasure  and  displeasure  give rise to the afflictions  or disturbing  emotions  
(Skt. kleshas ), which  then cause  all the suffering  and illusory  appearances  
of samsara.
The  visual  consciousness  is in the brain  and sees  visual  information  from  
the eye and turns  it into images.  The auditory  consciousness  is in the brain  
and processes  sounds  heard  by the ears. The smell  consciousness  relates  to 
the nose organ  and differentiates  smells.  When  you taste something,  it is 
not the tongue  that  distinguishes  a taste,  rather  it is the taste  consciousness.  
The  fifth  consciousness  relates  to the tactile  organs  of  the body  and  perceives  
touch.
Each consciousness  has its own function.  For example,  the visual  con­
sciousness  perceives  an image  of  an object,  the ear consciousness  perceives  a 
sound,  and so forth.  Since  each  sensory  organ  and its respective  conscious ­
ness has a different  function,  they  are not one but distinctly  different  con­
sciousnesses.  The Buddha  explained  that the five sense  organs  and their  
corresponding  sensory  consciousnesses  are “without  thought, ” which  means  
that they do not discriminate  and make  judgments  about  the perception.  
The eye consciousness  merely  sees a visual  form,  and the nose only  smells  
without  the ability  to distinguish,  for example,  between  two  different  smells.  
It is the mental  consciousness  that differentiates  and identifies  perceptions  
and therefore  the mental  consciousness  is said to be “with  thought. ”

164 — APPENDIX  C
The Sixth  Consciousness , the Mental  Consciousness
The sixth  consciousness,  the mental  consciousness,  is internal  and refers  to 
the individuals  experience  of  happiness,  suffering,  excitement,  and  frustra ­
tion. Some  people think  that all mental  events —thoughts, memories,  and 
anticipations  of the future — take  place  in the brain.  The brain  is involved,  
but recollecting  the past, reflecting  on the present,  and planning  for the 
future,  with  all their  emotions  of happiness,  sadness,  and frustration,  take 
place  in the mental  consciousness.
The Seventh  Consciousness , the  Afflicted  
Consciousness
The seventh  consciousness  is known  as “the afflicted  (klesha)  conscious ­
ness. ” Whether  we are awake  or asleep,  happy  or sad, the mind  clings  to 
the feeling  of the existence of “I,” of a self, and we are very  attached  to this 
regardless  of what  experiences  we encounter  or what  time  of day it is. This  
afflicted  consciousness  is the feeling  of  ego and is like a bridge  between  the 
sixth  consciousness  and the eighth  consciousness.  It experiences  the mate ­
rial coming  from  the eighth  consciousness  and assumes  that it is a real self.
The Eighth  Consciousness , the  All-Basis  
Consciousness
The eighth  consciousness  is called  the “ground ” (Skt. alaya ) or “all-basis ” 
consciousness.  It is the basis  out of which  all the other  consciousnesses  arise.  
The eighth  consciousness  has two functions:  (i) to know  everything  taking  
place  in the mind  in the moment  (the  immediate  function)  and (2) to record  
all habitual  patterns  accumulated  through  mental  and physical  activities  
(the storehouse function). 70
Upon  realization,  these  eight  consciousnesses  are transformed  into the five 
wisdoms  of the five buddha  families  (see appendix  B).

Glossary
Abhidharma.  Buddhist  teachings  classifying  phenomena  into types  and categories.  
One of the Three  Baskets  (Tripitaka),  the other  two being  the Sutras  (teachings  of 
the Buddha) and  the Vinaya  (teachings  on conduct).  Also  it is an authoritative  set of 
scriptures  on Buddhist  metaphysics,  according  to the Foundation  tradition.
Akshobhya.  A sambhogakaya  buddha  of the vajra family.  He is blue in color  and 
resides  in the east of the mandala.  See also five buddha  families.
all-basis  consciousness  (Skt. alayd).  The eighth  consciousness,  according  to the 
Mind-Only  school.  It is often  called  the “ground  consciousness ” or “storehouse  con­
sciousness ” because  it is the container  or foundation  for all the other  consciousnesses  
and stores  all the latent  imprints of  the sixth  consciousness.
Amitabha.  Known  as the “buddha  of boundless  light. ” A sambhogakaya  buddha  of 
the lotus  family.  He is red in color and resides  in the west of the mandala.  See also 
five buddha  families.
Amoghasiddhi.  A sambhogakaya  buddha  of the karma  family.  He is green  in color  
and resides  in the north  of the mandala  and represents  accomplishment  in Oharma.  
See also five buddha  families.
amrita.  See healing  nectar.
arhat.  The  highest  level  of practitioner  on the Foundation  path,  one  who  is free from  
the four  maras:  the mara  of conflicting  emotions,  the mara  of the deva,  the mara  of 
death,  and the mara  of the aggregates  (Skt.  skandhas).
bardo.  The intermediate  state  between  the end of one life and rebirth  into another.  
The bardo  can also be divided  into six different  levels:  the bardo  of birth,  dreams,  
meditation,  the moment  before  death, dharmata,  and becoming.
bhikshu.  A fully  ordained  Buddhist  monk.
bindus.  Subtle  drops,  or spheres  of energy,  that  are often  visualized  in Vajrayana  prac­
tice. They  travel  in the subtle  channels  of the subtle body.  See also subtle  channels.
blessings  (Tib .jinlap).  Energy  created  by the buddhas  and  bodhisattvas  that  an indi­
vidual  who has great  devotion  can “tap into ” or receive.  The blessings  of the lineage  
are always  present  but can be received  only  if one is receptive  to them.  They  are not 
something  bestowed externally  by more  enlightened  beings.

i66 GLOSSARY
bodhi  tree. A pipal  tree (a kind of fig tree) with heart-shaped  leaves.  The Buddha  
achieved  enlightenment  under  one of these  trees  in Bodh  Gaya.
bodhichitta.  Literally,  “the mind  of enlightenment. ” There  are two  kinds  of bodhi-  
chitta:  absolute  bodhichitta,  which  is the completely awakened  mind  that realizes  
the emptiness  of phenomena,  and relative  bodhichitta,  which  is the aspiration  to 
practice  the six paramitas  and free all beings  from the suffering  of samsara.
bodhisattva. Literally,  “one who  exhibits the mind  of enlightenment. ” An individ ­
ual who is committed  to the Mahayana  path of practicing  compassion  and the six 
paramitas  in order  to achieve  buddhahood  and  free all beings  from  samsara.
buddha  nature  or buddha  essence  (Skt.  tathagatagarbha).  The  original  nature  pres­
ent in all sentient  beings  that, when  realized,  leads to enlightenment.  Although  it 
is called  “buddha  nature, ” it is common  to all sentient  beings, not just Buddhists.
chakras.  Literally,  “wheels. ” Centers  of  energy  along  the central  channel  at the fore­
head,  throat,  heart,  solar  plexus,  and the tip of the sexual  organ,  where  there  is a 
broadening  of channels.
Chakrasamvara.  One  of  the five main  deities  of  the Kagyu  lineage.  He belongs  to the 
lotus  family  and Chakrasamvara  practice  plays  an important  part  in the Six Yogas  of 
Naropa.  The  other  four  main  deities  of the Kagyu  lineage  are Mahamaya,  Vajrayogini  
(who  is the consort  of Chakrasamvara),  Guhyasamaja,  and Hevajra.
Chenrezik  (Skt.  Avalokiteshvara).  A deity  representing  compassion.
Chittamatra  school. See Mind-Only  school.
coemergent  wisdom.  The advanced  realization  of the inseparability  of  samsara  and 
nirvana  and how  these  arise  together  simultaneously.
completion  stage.  A method  of  tantric  meditation  in which  one attains  bliss,  clarity,  
and nonthought  by means  of  working  with  the subtle  channels  and energies  within  
the body.  See also creation  stage.
Consequence  school  (Skt.  prasangika).  One  of  the two major  schools  of  the Middle  
Way  Mahayana  school,  which  is associated  with Chandrakirti.  The other  tradition  
is associated  with  Kamalashila.
conventional  truth  or reality  (Tib.  kunsop ). The perception  of an ordinary  (unen­
lightened)  person who sees the world  veiled  by his or her projections  that are based  
on the false  belief  in a solid  self.
creation  stage.  Also  known  as the generation  stage.  A method  of meditation  that 
involves  visualizing  and contemplating  deities  for the purpose  of realizing  the 
purity of all phenomena.  In this stage,  visualization  of the deity  is established  and 
maintained.
cyclic  existence. See samsara.
daka.  The male  counterpart to a dakini.  See also dakini.
dakini.  Literally,  “sky goer. ” A yogini  who  has attained  high realization.  She may  be

GLOSSARY  ~ 167
a human  being  who  has achieved  such  an attainment  or a nonhuman  manifestation  
of  the enlightened  mind  of a meditational  deity.
Dark  Retreat.  A practice  in which  one goes  into a cabin  or place  that is completely  
dark  and meditates there  for a week  or longer.
Dharma.  The teachings  of the Buddha  (also called  “Buddhadharma ”). See also 
dharmas.
dharmadhatu.  The all-encompassing  space,  unoriginated  and without  beginning,  
out of  which  all phenomena  arise.  The Sanskrit  term  means  “the essence  of  phenom ­
ena, ” and the Tibetan  equivalent means  “the expanse  of  phenomena, ” but it usually  
refers  to emptiness,  which  is the essence  of  phenomena.
dharmakaya.  One  of the three bodies of the buddha.  It is enlightenment  itself,  the 
wisdom  that is beyond  reference  points.  See also  three  kayas.
dharmas.  Phenomena  or truths.  See also Dharma.
dharmata.  Phenomena  as they  really  are or as perceived  by a completely  enlightened  
being  who  is without  any  distortion  or obscuration.  Dharmata  is often  translated  as 
“suchness, ” “the true nature  of things, ” or “things  as they  are.”
disturbing  emotions  (Skt.  kleshas).  Emotional  obscurations  (in contrast  to intellec ­
tual obscurations),  also called  “afflictions ” or “poisons. ” The three  main  disturbing  
emotions  are attachment,  anger,  and ignorance  or delusion.  The five disturbing  emo ­
tions  are the three  above  plus pride  and jealousy.
doha.  A spiritual  song  spontaneously  composed  by a Vajrayana  practitioner.  They  
were originally  composed  in the Apabhramsha language  in the seventh  to twelfth  
centuries  in northeastern India  in the form  of rhyming  couplets  {do means  “two”).
Drime  Lingpa  (1700-1775).  An incarnation  of Padmasambhava  s disciple  Gyalwa  
Choyang.  He is known  as a terton who revealed  some  of Padmasambhava  s hidden  
teachings.
dullness,  or torpor  (Tib.  mukpa).  One  of the two  main  obstacles  to meditation.  Dull ­
ness  refers  to a sinking,  lethargic  feeling  that  often  leads  to sleep.  See also  excitement.  
Dzogchen.  Also known  as “Great  Perfection. ” This is one of the main  practices  of 
the Nyingma  tradition  and,  like Mahamudra,  involves  directly  examining  the mind,  
eight  consciousnesses.  The five sensory  consciousnesses  of sight,  hearing,  smell,  
taste,  touch,  and bodily  sensation;  the mental  consciousness  (sixth),  which  is our 
ordinary thinking;  the afflicted  (klesha)  consciousness  (seventh),  which  is the ever­
present  feeling  of  “I”; and the ground  (alaya ) consciousness (eighth),  which  holds  the 
other  consciousnesses  together  and also stores  karmic  latencies,  
eight  forms  of leisure.  Eight  conditions  favorable  to practicing  Dharma.  They  are (1) 
not being  born  into  one of  the hell realms,  (z) not being  born  as a hungry  ghost (Skt.  
preta),  (3) not being  born  as an animal,  (4) not being  born  in the god realm  (which  
is part of samsara),  (5) not being  born  in a country  without  the Buddhist  Dharma,

i68 GLOSSARY
(6) not possessing  wrong  views  such  as denying  that  there  is such  thing  as karma,  (7) 
not being  born  where  a buddha  has not appeared,  and (8) not being  too mentally  or 
physically  handicapped  to practice  the Dharma.
eighty-four  thousand  teachings.  The  twenty-one  thousand  teachings  of the Buddha  
on each  of the Vinaya,  Sutra,  Abhidharma,  and their  combination.  Their  purpose  is 
to eliminate  the eighty-four thousand  different types of disturbing  emotions  latent  
in ones  mind.  This  is a symbolic  number  indicating  a vast number  of teachings.
empowerment  (Skt.  abhisheka).  A ceremony  in which  a qualified  lama  gives  the stu­
dent permission  to begin  the practice.  To do a particular  Vajrayana  practice,  one 
should  receive  permission  from a qualified  lama,  and one should  also receive  the 
practice  instruction  (Tib.  tri) and the textual reading  (Tib.  lung).  
excitement  (Tib.  gopa).  One of the two main  obstacles  to meditation.  When  the 
mind  is in a state  of  excitement, it is wild,  jumping  from  thought  to thought,  so that 
one cannot  meditate  properly.  See also dullness.
father  tantra.  One  of  the three  kinds  of tantras.  The father  tantra  is concerned  with  
transforming  aggression.  See also  mother  tantra.
feast  offering  (Skt  .ganachakrd).  An offering  of  food  and other  delights  that is given  
in important  practices,  which  is a way of showing  respect  to the deities.  The food  is 
later  eaten  by the attendees  as well as offered  to the animals  outside,  
five actions  of immediate  consequence.  Actions  that will cause  one ’s very next  
rebirth  to be in a lower  realm.  These  are (1) killing  one ’s father,  (a) killing  one ’s 
mother,  (3) killing  an arhat,  (4) intentionally  wounding  a buddha  and causing  him 
or her to bleed, and  (5) creating  a schism  in the sangha.
five  aggregates  (Skt.  skandhas).  The  five collections  that  compose  sentient  beings.  In 
the  Surangama  Sutra,  the Buddha  said  that  a person  was made  up of  five aggregates  or 
heaps.  The first aggregate  is form,  which  is material  and is what  one perceives  in the 
outside  world.  The second  through  fifth  aggregates  are not material,  but mental.  The 
second  aggregate  is sensation,  which  can be positive,  negative,  or neutral.  The third  
aggregate  is identification  or perception,  which  labels  and categorizes  the sensation.  
The fourth  aggregate  is formation,  which  combines  the perception  with  past  experi­
ence.  The fifth aggregate  is consciousness, which  is ordinary consciousness  with  all 
its discursive  thoughts.
five buddha  families.  The five families  to which  the five sambhogakaya  buddhas  
belong.  Each  sambhogakaya  buddha  embodies  one of  the five enlightened  wisdoms.  
Vairochana  of the buddha  family  represents  the dharmadhatu  wisdom,  Akshobhya  
of the vajra  family  represents  the mirrorlike  wisdom,  Ratnasambhava  of the  jewel  
family  represents  the wisdom  of equality,  Amitabha  of the lotus  family  represents  
the discriminating  wisdom,  and  Amoghasiddhi  of the karma  family represents  the 
all-accomplishing  wisdom.  See also appendix  B.
five paths.  Five stages,  or paths,  to enlightenment:  (1) the path of accumulation.

GLOSSARY  — 169
which  emphasizes  purifying  one s obscurations  and  accumulating  merit;  (2) the  path  
of junction,  or application,  in which  the meditator  develops  profound  understanding  
of the four  noble  truths and cuts the root  to the desire  realm;  (3) the path  of insight,  
or seeing,  in which  the meditator  develops  greater  insight  and enters  the first  bodhi-  
sattva  level;  (4) the path  of meditation, in  which  the meditator  cultivates insight  on 
the second  through  tenth  bodhisattva  levels;  and (5) the path  of fulfillment,  which  
is the complete attainment  of  buddhahood.
Foundation  Vehicle.  Also  called  the “shravaka ” path.  It focuses  on contemplation  of 
the four  noble  truths,  the twelve  links  of  dependent  origination,  and  the selflessness  
of  persons  for the sake  of ones  individual  liberation.
four  common  preliminaries.  Four  points  to be contemplated  before  beginning  any 
Vajrayana  practice:  precious  human  birth;  impermanence  and the inevitability  of 
death;  karma  and its effects;  and the faults  of  samsara.  They  are also called  “the four 
thoughts  that  turn  the mind. ” See also four  special  preliminaries.
four  extremes.  Four  conceptions  that  are inadequate to describe  the nature  of  phe­
nomena,  according  to Middle  Way  Buddhist  philosophy.  These  are (1) the  extreme  of 
existence,  (2) of  nonexistence,  (3) of  both  existence  and  nonexistence  and (4) neither  
existence  nor nonexistence.
four  seals.  The four  main  principles  of  Buddhism:  all compounded  phenomena  are 
impermanent,  everything  defiled  (with  ego-clinging)  is suffering,  all phenomena  are 
empty  and devoid  of a self-entity,  and nirvana  is perfect  peace.
four  special  preliminaries.  (Tib.  ngondro).  Practices  that  should  be completed  at the 
beginning  of the Vajrayana  path:  one hundred thousand  refuge  prayers  and  prostra ­
tions,  one hundred  thousand  Vajrasattva  mantras,  one hundred  thousand mandala  
offerings,  and one hundred  thousand  guru  yoga  practices.  See also four common  
preliminaries.
Gampopa  (1079-1153).  One  of  the main  lineage  holders  of  the Karma  Kagyu  lineage
in Tibet.  A student  of  Milarepa,  he established  the first Kagyu monastic monastery
and is best  known  for  writing  the  Jewel  Ornament  of Liberation.
gandharvas.  A class  of  deities  that  are nourished  by smells.  They  are also the celestial
musicians.
garuda.  A mythical  bird  that  hatches  fully  grown.
Gelug  school.  One of the four main  schools  of Tibetan  Buddhism,  founded  by 
Tsongkhapa  (1357-1419)  and  presently  headed  by His Holiness  the Fourteenth  Dalai  
Lama.
geshe.  A scholar  who  has attained  a doctorate  in Buddhist  studies.  This  usually  takes  
seven  to twelve  years  to attain.
Guhyasamaja  tantra.  A father  tantra  of  the Anuttarayoga  Tantra,  which  is the high ­
est of the four  tantras.  Guhyasamaja  is the central  deity  of the vajra  family.

170 GLOSSARY
Guru  Rinpoche.  See Padmasambhava.
guru  yoga.  A practice  of  devotion  to the guru  that  culminates  in receiving  his bless ­
ing and blending  indivisibly  with  his mind.  Also  the fourth  practice  of  the four  spe­
cial preliminaries  (Tib.  ngondro ).
healing  nectar  (Skt.  amrita , Tib. dutsi).  A blessed  liquid  substance  that can cause  
spiritual  and  physical  healing.
heruka.  In Indian  culture,  a spirit  originally  associated  with  cremation  grounds.  In 
Buddhism,  the name  for a male  deity  in a wrathful  form.  Can  also  be used  to refer  to 
the deities  Chakrasamvara  and Hevajra.
Hevajra tantra.  A mother  tantra  of the Anuttarayoga Tantra,  which  is the highest  
of the four tantras.  Hevajra  is one of the main  yidams of  Vajrayana  Buddhism.  The 
Hevajra  tantra  was taught  to Tilopa,  who  taught  Naropa,  who  passed  it on to Marpa.  
Marpa  also received  instructions  on this tantra  from  Maitripa.
inner  heat (Tib.  tummo).  An advanced  Vajrayana  practice  for combining  bliss and 
emptiness,  which  produces  heat  as a byproduct.  One of the Six Dharmas  (or Yogas)  
ofNaropa.
interdependent origination.  The principle  that nothing  exists  independently  but 
comes into  existence  only  in dependence  on various  previous  causes  and conditions.  
There  are twelve  successive  phases  of this process  that  begin  with  ignorance  and end 
with  old age and death.
Jamgon  Kongtrul  (1813-1899).  Also known  as Lodro  Thaye.  A prolific  writer  of 
ninety  volumes  of Tibetan  Buddhist  works.  He is best  known  for founding  the Rime  
movement,  which  was a nonsectarian,  eclectic  movement  that  preserved  the various  
practice  lineages that  were  on the verge  of extinction.
Kagyu.  One  of  the four  major  schools  of Tibetan  Buddhism,  founded  by Marpa.  The 
other  three  are the Nyingma,  the Sakya,  and the Gelugpa  schools.
karma.  Literally  “action. ” Karma  is a universal  law that  when  one performs  a whole ­
some  action,  one ’s circumstances  will eventually  improve,  and when  one performs  
an unwholesome  action, negative  results  will eventually  occur.
Karma  Kagyu.  One  of  the four  greater  Kagyu  lineages,  headed  by His Holiness  the 
Karmapa.  Also  called  the “Kamtsang  Kagyu. ”
Karmamudra.  A practice  that involves  using  the energies  of sexual  union  to reach  
higher  levels  of  meditation.  There  is an “upper-door  practice, ” in which  one  visualizes  
union  with  a consort,  and there is the “lower-door  practice, ” in which  one actually  
engages  in sexual  union  with  one ’s consort.
karmic  latencies  or imprints  (Tib.  bakchal :). Impressions  left on our mind  by what  
we think,  say, and  do that  are stored  in the eighth  consciousness.  These  latencies  ripen  
into  various  kinds  of  experiences  when  they  leave  the eighth  consciousness  and enter  
the sixth  consciousness  upon  being  stimulated  by external  experience.  See also  eight  
consciousnesses.

GLOSSARY  — 171
Khenpo  GangsharWangpo  (1915-?).  A teacher  from  Shechen  Monastery  who  was a 
lama  to Thrangu  Rinpoche,  Chogyam  Trungpa,  and  DezhungRinpoche.  His  teach ­
ings can  be found  in Thrangu  Rinpoches  book  Vivid  Awareness.
kleshas.  See disturbing  emotions.
Lavapa.  Also known  as Kambala.  A tenth-century  mahasiddha  who is known  for 
teaching  dream  yoga,  which  he taught  to Tilopa.
Leap  (Tib.  togal).  Literally,  “leap over. ” One  of the two basic  methods  of Dzogchen  
meditation.  Leap  Over  is a series  ofyogic  practices  that affect  the subtle winds  and 
channels of the body.
life-supporting  wind  (Skt.prana,  Tib. lung).  The subtle  energy  that  gives  the inani ­
mate  body  the energy  to be a living  system.  It flows  in the body ’s subtle  channels  (Skt.  
nadis).  See also subtle  channels.
Luipa.  Literally,  “fish  eater. ” One  of the eighty-four  mahasiddhas.  He lived  in eastern  
India  in the eighth century  and wrote  a number  of texts.  He is especially  associated  
with  one of the three  Chakrasamvara  lineages.
luminous  clarity  (Tib.  salwa).  The  knowing  that  is characteristic  of the insubstantial  
mind.  In the third  turning  of the wheel  ofDharma,  it is said  that  everything  is empty  
or insubstantial  but that this emptiness  is not completely  void because  it has the 
quality  of knowing,  which  is called  “lucidity, ” “luminosity, ” or “luminous  clarity. ” 
Lucidity  or luminous  clarity  allows  all phenomena  to appear.
Machik  Lapdron  (1031-112.9).  A famous  female  saint who developed  the Chod  
practice  of “cutting  off” (one ’s attachment  to one ’s body),  which  is said to be the 
only  practice  developed  in Tibet  that was actually  taken  back to India  and also 
practiced  there.
Madhyamaka.  The Middle  Way  school, the highest  of  the four  Buddhist  schools  of 
philosophy.  To practice  the Middle  Way  means  not to hold  any  extreme  views,  espe ­
cially  those  ofeternalism  and  nihilism.  See also  Rangtong  Madhyamaka,  Shentong  
Madhyamaka.
Mahamudra  (Tib.  chak  gya chen  po). Literally,  “Great  Seal ” or “Great  Symbol. ” A 
meditation  practice  that emphasizes  perceiving the nature  of mind  directly  rather  
than  understanding  it through  inferential  reasoning.
mahasiddha.  A practitioner  who  has a great  deal  of  realization.  Many  practiced  out­
side the normal  religious  establishment  in places  such  as cemeteries  and engaged  in 
fairly  outrageous  behavior.
Mahayana.  Literally,  the “Great  Vehicle. ” This  term  was first used  in the  Lotus  Sutra.  
In India,  this was not a separate  school,  but a set of teachings found  within  various  
Buddhist  schools. The Mahayana  emphasizes  compassion and the bodhisattva  path  
of  practicing  the six paramitas.  It is particularly  associated  with  the Mind-Only  and 
Middle  Way  schools. See  also six paramitas.
Maitreya.  A buddha  who  resides  in the Tushita  pure  realm  until  he becomes  the next

172 . GLOSSARY
buddha  of this eon. He is known  for transmitting  the five treatises  of Maitreya  to 
Asanga, of  which  the Uttaratantra  is best known.
mandala.  A diagram  used in Vajrayana  practices.  It usually  represents  the three-  
dimensional  palace  of the central  deity  with  other  deities  placed  in the four  directions.
Mantrayana.  See  Vajrayana.
Marpa  Chokyi Lodro  (ion-1097).  A Tibetan  who made  three  trips to India  and 
brought  back  many  tantric  texts that he translated  into Tibetan  including  the Six 
Dharmas  of  Naropa,  the Guhyasamaja,  and the Chakrasamvara  practices.  A student  
of Naropa,  Marpa  founded  the Kagyu  lineage in Tibet.
meditational  deity.  See yidam.
Middle  Way  school.  See Madhyamaka.
Milarepa  (1040-1113).  A student  of  Marpa  who  attained  enlightenment  in one life­
time.  His student  Gampopa  founded  the Dagpo  Kagyu  lineage.
Mind-Only  school  (Skt. Chittamatra).  One of the four major  schools  in the 
Mahayana  tradition,  founded  by Asanga  in the fourth  century.  Its main  tenet  (to 
greatly  simplify)  is that  all phenomena  (internal and external)  are mental  events.
Mipham  Rinpoche  (1846-1911).  A very  influential  philosopher  and teacher  in the 
Nyingma  school  of  Tibetan  Buddhism.  He wrote  over  thirty-two  volumes  on many  
subjects  and is one of the major  founders  of the Rime  nonsectarian  movement.
mother  tantra.  One of the three  kinds  of tantras.  The mother  tantra  is concerned  
with  transforming  passion. See  also father  tantra.
mudra.  A “ hand  seal, ” or gesture,  that  is performed  in specific  tantric  ritual  practices  
to symbolize  certain aspects  of the practice,  
nadis  (Tib. tsa). See subtle  channels.
Nagarjuna.  An Indian  scholar  in the second  century  who  founded  the  Madhyamaka  
philosophical  school  that  emphasizes  emptiness. See also Madhyamaka.
nagas.  Water  spirits  that  may  take  the form  of  serpents.  They  are often  the custodian  
of treasures —either  texts  or material  treasures —that they  keep  underground.
Nalanda.  A famous  Buddhist  university  that flourished  from  the fifth to the tenth  
centuries,  located  near  modern  Rajgir,  in the Indian  state  of  Bihar.  It was the seat of 
the Mahayana  teachings, and  many  great  Buddhist  scholars  studied  there.
Naropa  (956-1040).  An Indian  master  who is best known  for transmitting  many  
Vajrayana  teachings  to Marpa,  who took  them  back to Tibet,  where  many  became  
important  practices  in the Kagyu  lineage.
nine  formless  dakinis.  Teachings  received  by Tilopa  from  the wisdom  dakinis  at 
the Gandhola  Temple.  These  teachings  were  then transmitted  to Naropa, and then,  
in part,  to Marpa,  Milarepa,  and his disciples.
nirmanakaya  (Tib.  tulku).  One  of  the three  bodies  of  the Buddha.  The nirmanakaya,

GLOSSARY 173
or “emanation  body, ” manifests  in the world  and is perceptible  to ordinary  people.  
For example,  Shakyamuni Buddha  was a nirmanakaya.  See also three  kayas.
Nyingma  school.  The oldest  school  of Tibetan  Buddhism.  It is based  on the teach ­
ings of Padmasambhava  and others  in the eighth  and  ninth  centuries.
oral  instructions  (Tib.  men  ngafi).  Instructions  given  directly  by a guru  to his or her 
students  concerning  meditation  on the nature  of  mind.  While  some  of  these  are writ­
ten down,  many  are passed  on only  orally.  Sometimes  they  are called  “quintessential  
instructions ” or “pith  instructions. ”
Padmasambhava  (Tib.  Guru  Rinpoche).  Founder  of  the Nyingma  school  of Tibetan  
Buddhism.  He was invited  to Tibet  in the eighth  century  and is known  for pacifying  
the non-Buddhist forces.  He taught  many  tantras  and Vajrayana  practices  and con­
cealed  many  texts  that  were  to be revealed  later  by his disciples.
pandita.  A great  scholar.
parinirvana.  The event  of Buddha ’s death.  It is called  “parinirvana ” because  it was 
the end of all rebirth  since  he had achieved  complete  enlightenment.
Patrul  Rinpoche  (1808-1887).  A famous  Nyingma  teacher  who  wrote  The Words  of 
My  Perfect  Teacher.
pith  instructions.  See oral instructions.
prajna  (Tib.  sherab ). A term  with  multiple  meanings:  perfect  knowledge,  wisdom,  
understanding,  or discrimination.  Usually  it means  the wisdom  of seeing  things  
from  a nondualistic  point  of  view.
Prajnaparamita.  Sanskrit  for “perfection  of wisdom. ” The transcendent  perfect  wis­
dom  (prajna ) of  the Mahayana  path  regarding  emptiness.  It also  refers  to a collection  
of about  forty  Mahayana  sutras  that deal  with  the perfection  of  wisdom.
prana. See life-supporting  wind.
pratyekabuddhas.  “Solitary  awakened  ones. ” Foundation-level  practitioners  who  
practice  alone  and have attained  awakening  on their  own with no teacher  guiding  
them.  Generally  placed  on a higher  level than an arhat,  they  have  attained  the frui­
tion  of  the second  level  of  the Foundation  path  through  contemplation  of  the twelve  
interdependent  links.
Rangjung  Dorje  (1284-1339).  The Third  Gyalwa  Karmapa,  known  for writing  a 
series  of texts  widely  used in the Karma  Kagyu  school.  His text Buddha Nature,  
which  is on Mahamudra  meditation, and The  Distinction  between  Consciousness  and 
Wisdom  introduced  the ShentongMadhyamaka  view  into  the Karma  Kagyu  lineage.  
See also  Shentong  Madhyamaka.
Rangtong  Madhyamaka.  A subschool  of Madhyamaka  that  is based  on the second  
turning  of the wheel  of Dharma  and teaches  that  reality  is empty  of self  (Tib.  rang­
tong)  and beyond  concepts.
samadhi.  A state of meditation  that is nondualistic —there is an absence  of

174 — GLOSSARY
discrimination  between  self  and other.  Also  called  “meditative  absorption ” or “one-  
pointed  meditation, ” this is the highest  form  of meditation.
Samantabhadra  (Tib.  Kuntuzangpo).  The  primordial  dharmakaya  buddha,  accord­
ing to the Nyingma  school.  Samantabhadra  is also the name  of  one of the eight  main  
bodhisattvas  who  attended the historical  Buddha.
samaya.  The vows  or commitments  made  in the Vajrayana  to a teacher  or practice.  
These  often  include  maintaining  a harmonious  relationship  with  the  vajra  master  and 
one ’s Dharma  friends  and not straying  from  the continuity  of the practice.
sambhogakaya.  One  of the three bodies  of the Buddha.  It is also called  the “enjoy ­
ment  body. ” To make  it possible  for high practitioners  or bodhisattvas  to contact  
the dharmakaya,  the dharmakaya  displays  itself  in the form  of the sambhogakaya.  
See also three  kayas.
samsara.  The  conditioned  existence  of ordinary  life in which  suffering  occurs  because  
one still possesses  attachment,  aggression,  and ignorance;  that is, “cyclic  existence. ” 
It is contrasted  to nirvana.
sangha.  Companions  on the path to awakening.  It may include  all the persons  on 
the path  or just the noble  sangha,  which  are the realized  ones.
Saraha.  A mahasiddha  and yogi who lived  in India  in the eighth  century  and was 
taught  Mahamudra  by a female  arrow  maker.  He  wrote  three  dohas,  which  are con­
sidered  the first  written  descriptions  of Mahamudra  meditation.
seed syllable.  A Tibetan  letter,  or syllable,  that symbolizes  the essence  of a deity  
or an element.  Tantric  practices  often  involve visualizing  seed syllables,  which  then  
transform  into  the deity  or element  it represents.  For  example,  H Ri is the seed  syllable  
for Chenrezik,  so one  would  first  visualize  empty  space,  and  then  a H ri arising  from  
it, which then  would  transform  into Chenrezik.
selflessness  (Tib.  dak me). Also  called  “egolessness. ” The absence  of an inherently  
existing  self. In two of the Foundation  schools  (Vaibhashika  and Sautrantika),  this 
refers  exclusively  to the fact that a person  lacks a real permanent  self, being  just a 
collection  of thoughts  and feelings.  In two of the Mahayana  schools  (Chittamatra  
and Madhyamaka),  this was extended  to mean  that outside  phenomena  also lack 
inherent  existence.
Shakyamuni  Buddha  (563-483  bce). The  historical  Buddha,  often  called  “Gautama  
Buddha. ”
Shentong  Madhyamaka.  A subschool  of Madhyamaka that is based  on the third  
turning  of the wheel  of Dharma  and teaches  that reality  is emptiness  inseparable  
from luminosity,  where  emptiness  means  “empty  of other ” (Tib.  shentong  rather  
than  “empty  of self, ” as in Rangtong  Madhyamaka.
shravakas.  Literally,  “those  who  hear. ” It refers  to realized  Foundation  practitioners  
(arhats)  who  have  achieved the realization  of the nonexistence  of a personal  self.
siddhas.  Accomplished  Buddhist  practitioners.

GLOSSARY  — 175
siddhis.  Spiritual  accomplishments  of  advanced  practitioners.  The  “supreme  siddhi ” 
refers  to complete  enlightenment,  whereas  the “common  siddhis ” refer  to the eight  
mundane  accomplishments,  which  are powers  such  as being  able to visit  the celestial  
realms,  having  fast legs able to travel  great  distances  with many  obstacles  in a very  
short  time,  and having  blessing  pills that make  you invisible.
six  paramitas.  A Sanskrit  term  meaning  “perfections. ” The  Tibetan  translation  liter­
ally means  “gone  to the other  side. ” These  are the six practices  of  the Mahayana  path:  
transcendent  generosity,  transcendent  discipline,  transcendent patience,  transcen­
dent exertion,  transcendent meditation,  and transcendent  knowledge  ($\x.prajnd).  
When  listed  as tenfold,  they consist  of these  six plus skillful  means,  aspirational  
prayer,  power,  and pure  wisdom  (Tib. yeshe).
skillful  means  (Skt. up ay a). The skillful  methods  used by enlightened  beings  to 
present  the Dharma  by taking  a person  s capabilities  and propensities  into account.
subtle  channels  (Skt.  nadis ). Subtle  pathways  that  are not anatomical  but more  like 
acupuncture  meridians,  through  which  subtle  energy  (Skt.prana)  travels  in the form  
of  subtle  drops  (Skt.  bindus).  These  energies  are utilized  in advanced  tantric  practices  
through  special  physical  exercises  (Tib.  trulkhor)  and visualization  techniques.  See 
also bindus,  life-supporting  wind,  vajra  body.
sutras.  Foundation  and Mahayana  texts that were recorded  as being  the words  of 
the Buddha.  These  are often  contrasted  with the tantras,  which  are the Buddhas  
Vajrayana  teachings,  and the shastras,  which  are the commentaries on the words of 
the Buddha  by great  scholars  (panditas).
tathagatagarbha.  Literally,  “the nature  of the ones thus gone, ” usually  translated  
into  English  as “buddha  nature ” or “buddha  essence. ” It is the seed,  or essence,  of  the 
tathagatas,  which  is the essence  of  enlightenment  possessed  by all sentient  beings  and 
that  gives  them the potential  to attain  enlightenment.
ten bodhisattva  levels  (Skt. bhumis).  Literally,  “ground. ” The levels,  or stages,  a 
bodhisattva  goes through  to reach  enlightenment.  There  are ten levels  in the sutra  
tradition  and thirteen  in the tantra  tradition. The first  level  is the direct  realization  
of  emptiness,  and the final  level  is buddhahood.
ten endowments.  The ten qualities  a person  must  possess  that will enable  them  to 
practice the Dharma. These  are (1) to be born  a human,  (z) to reside  in a land  where  
the Dharma  is practiced,  (3) to possess  all of  the mental  and  physical  faculties  needed  
to practice  the Dharma,  (4) to not experience  great  negative  karma  that  inclines  one 
not to practice  the Dharma,  (5) to have faith in the Dharma,  (6) to have a buddha  
who  has appeared  in the world  where  one is born,  (7) to have  this buddha  teach  the 
Dharma,  (8) to have  been  born at a time  where  the Dharma  still exists,  (9) to be in a 
place  where  the Dharma  is still practiced,  and (10) to have  a spiritual  master  who  has 
accepted  one as a student.
ten nonvirtuous  actions.  A list of  nonvirtuous  deeds  compiled  at the request  of the 
Dharma  King  Trisong  Detsen  that could  be used  by his subjects:  killing,  stealing,

176 — GLOSSARY
sexual  misconduct,  lying,  slander,  abusive  words,  idle gossip,  covetousness,  ill will,  
and wrong  views.  These  acts result  in undesirable  karmic  effects  that will express  
themselves  later  in one ’s life or even in future  lifetimes.  The first three  are actions  of 
body,  the next four of speech,  and the last three  of mind.  The ten virtuous  actions  
are the opposites  of the above  ten nonvirtuous  actions.
Tengyur.  Shastras,  or commentaries, on the sutras  in the Tibetan  Buddhist  canon,  
called  the “Kangyur. ”
three  kayas.  The three  bodies  of the Buddha:  the nirmanakaya,  sambhogakaya,  and 
dharmakaya.  The dharmakaya,  also called  the “truth  body, ” is the complete  enlight ­
enment,  or the complete  wisdom,  of the Buddha,  which  is unoriginated  wisdom  
beyond  form.  It manifests  in the sambhogakaya  and the nirmanakaya.  The sam­
bhogakaya,  also called  the “enjoyment body, ” appears  only  to bodhisattvas,  usually  
when  they  reside  in one of the pure  lands.  The nirmanakaya,  also called  the “emana ­
tion body, ” manifests  in our  world  and can be seen  by ordinary  beings  with  impure  
perception. For example,  Shakyamuni Buddha  was a nirmanakaya.
three  realms.  Three  categories  of samsara:  the desire,  form, and formless  realms.  In 
the desire  realm,  beings  are reborn  in solid  bodies,  due to their  karma.  They  can be 
reborn  in circumstances that range  from  the god paradises  to the hell realms.  In the 
form  realm,  beings  are reborn  in a subtle  form,  due  to the power  of  meditation.  These  
are the meditation  paradises.  In the formless  realm,  beings  enter  a state  of  meditation  
after  death,  due to their  meditation  (samadhi),  in which  the  processes  of  thought  and 
perception  have  ceased.
Tilopa  (988-1069).  One  of  the eighty-four  mahasiddhas.  He was  the guru  ofNaropa,  
who  transmitted  Tilopa ’s teachings  to Marpa,  who then  brought  these  teachings  to 
Tibet,  where  they  became  the foundation  of the Kagyu  lineages  teachings.
tsakali.  A visual  image  or symbol.  It can also refer to a small  card on which  is a 
painted  image  of a deity,  offerings,  and so on, used  during  rites and  initiations.
twelve  ayatanas.  The  twelve  sensory  constituents  of  cognition.  These  are the five sen­
sory  objects  of  sights,  sounds,  smells,  tastes,  and bodily  textures,  plus  mental  objects,  
and the five sense  faculties of eyes,  ears,  nose, tongue, and body,  plus the mind.
vajra  (Tib.  dorje).  Usually  translated  as “diamond. ” It can refer  to an implement  held 
in the hand  during  certain  Vajrayana  ceremonies,  or it can refer  to a quality  that  is so 
pure  and enduring  that it is like a diamond.
vajra  body.  The  subtle  body,  which  is not anatomical  in nature,  that  contains  chakras,  
subtle  channels,  and subtle  drops  of energy  (Skt. bindus).  It is often  visualized  in 
advanced  tantric  practices.  See also bindus,  chakras, subtle  channels.
Vajradhara  (Tib. Dorje  Chang).  The dharmakaya  Buddha. Vajradhara  symbolizes  
the primordial  wisdom  of the dharmakaya  and is depicted  holding  a bell and vajra  
in his hands,  with  his arms  crossed  in front  of him,  and wearing  the ornaments  of a 
sambhogakaya  Buddha,  symbolizing  his richness.

GLOSSARY 177
Vajrayana.  “Diamond  Vehicle. ” One of the three major  traditions  of Buddhism  
(Foundation,  Mahayana,  and Vajrayana).  The Vajrayana is based  on the tantras  and 
emphasizes the clarity  aspect  of  phenomena.  It is practiced  mainly  in Tibet.
Vajrayogini  (Tib. Dorje  Palmo).  A semiwrathful  meditational  deity (Tib.  yidani ), 
also known  as Vajravarahi,  who is a consort  of Chakrasamvara.  She is a principal  
deity  within  the Karma  Kagyu tradition.
whispered  lineage.  Also  called  the “oral  lineage. ” The Kagyu lineage.
wisdom  of the nature  of phenomena.  Transcendent  knowledge  (Skt.jnana)  of a 
realized  practitioner  who  perceives  phenomena  as they  really  are (Skt.  dharmata ).
wisdom of the variety  of  phenomena.  Transcendent  knowledge  (Skt.jnana)  of a 
realized  practitioner  who  understands the vast variety  of phenomena.
yidam.  A tantric  deity  who  embodies  the qualities  of buddhahood  and is used as a 
meditational  deity  in Vajrayana  practice.  For example,  Chenrezik  is a yidam  who 
represents  true  compassion,  and he is visualized  in the Chenrezik  practice.
Yonge  Mingyur  Dorje  (1641-1708).  A treasure  revealer  (Tib. terton)  whose  appear ­
ance  was predicted by Padmasambhava.  He traveled  throughout  Tibet  practicing  a 
yogic  lifestyle  and  is known  for developing  a physical  antidote, based  on a vision,  to 
the Han  plague  that  was decimating  Tibet ’s yak  population.

Glossary  of Tibetan  Terms
Pronounced  Spelled  Meaning
bakchak
bardo
chak  gya
chak  gya chcn  po
Chenrezik
Cho  druk  gi men ngak
cho nyi
chongwa
dak me
damzik
de shin nyi
dikpa
dondam
dorje
Dorje  Chang
drippa
drol lam
ducsi
dzok  rim
geshe
gopa
giir
gyd
gyiiliibag chags
bardo
phyagrgya
phyag  rgya  chen  po
spyan  ras gzigs
chos  drug  gi man  ngag
chos nyid
mchong  ba
bdag  med
dam tshig
de bzhin  nyid
sdigpa
don dam
rdo rje
rdo rje chang  
sgrib  pa 
grol lam 
bdud rtsi 
rdzogs  rim 
dge bshes  
rgod  pa 
mgur  
rgyud  
sgyu  luskarmic  latencies
intermediate  state
mudra
Mahamudra
Avalokiteshvara
Six Dharmas  of  Tilopa
innate  luminosity
leap
no self
commitment
suchness, reality
wrongdoing
ultimate reality
vajra
Vajradhara  
obscuration  
path of liberation  
healing  nectar  
completion  stage  
accomplished  scholar  
mental  excitement  
spiritual  song  
tantra
illusory  body

i8o GLOSSARY  OF TIBETAN  TERMS
Pronounced Spelled Meaning
jinlap byin  rlabs blessing
Kagyu bka ’ brgyud Kagyu
khom goms habituation
kunsop kun rdzob relative  reality
Kuntuzangpo kun tu bzang  po Samantabhadra
ladawa la zla ba cross  over,  leap
lama bla ma guru
Ihenchik  kyepa lhan  cig skyes  pa coemergence
lung lung reading  transmission
lung  ten lung  bstan prophecy
mang  gakpa ma gags  pa unimpeded
marikpa ma rig pa ignorance
men ngak man ngag oral,  or pith,  instructions
mikpa  mepa dmigs  pa med  pa without  reference
mukpa rmugs  pa dullness
namtar rnam  thar spiritual  biography
naro  cho druk na ro’i chos  drug Six Dharmas  of  Naropa
ney luk gnas  lugs true nature,  manner  of 
abiding
ngowo ngobo essence
nyam nyams temporary  existence
nyen  gyii snyan  brgyud whispered  lineage
nyon  mong nyon  mongs affliction
nyiik  ma gnyug  ma natural  (innate)
rangtong rangstong empty  of self
rikpa rig pa awareness
rikpa  yeshe rig  pa ye shes awareness  wisdom
sarma gsar  ma new  translation  school
sem nyi sems  nyid mind ’s true nature
shentong gzhan  stong empty  of other
teso gtad  so reference  point
thamel  gyi shepa tha mal gyi shes pa original  mind
thap thabs skillful  means

GLOSSARY  OF TIBETAN  TERMS - 181
Pronounced Spelled Meaning
chap  lam chabs  lam pach  of  ripening
thukdam chugs  dam deach  praccice
cogal chod  rgal leap  over
tri ’khrid praccice  inscruccion
trul  khor ’khrul  ’khor yancra  yoga  poscures
tsakali csa ka li physical  represencacion
ciil shuk brcul  zhugs vanquishing  behavior
tummo gcum  mo inner  heac
wang dbang empowermenc
yidam yi dam medicacional  deity

Notes
1. Mahamudra  and  Related  Instructions:  Core Teachings  of the Kagyii  Schools,  trans.  
Peter  Alan  Roberts  (Somerville,  MA:  Wisdom Publications,  ion),  13.
2. The website  of  the Dharma  Fellowship  of  His Holiness  the Gyalwa  Karmapa,  www  
.dharmafellowship.org/biographies/historicalsaints/mahasiddha-sri-tilopa.htm.
3. IheLifeofTilopa,  in Religions  of  Tibet  in Practice,  ed. Donald  Lopez  (Princeton,  NJ: 
Princeton  University  Press,  1004),  137-56.
4. Tibetan  words  are given  as they  are pronounced,  not as they  are spelled  in Tibetan.  
The correct  transliterated  spelling  of these  words  may be found  in the glossary  of 
Tibetan  terms.
5. The Six Yogas  of Naropa  are six special  yogic  practices  that originated  with Tilopa  
and were  transmitted  to Naropa,  who then taught  them  to Marpa.  They  consist  of 
the subtle  heat,  illusory  body,  dream  yoga,  luminosity,  the ejection  of  consciousness,  
and the bardo practice.
6. Pith  instructions  (Tib.  men ngak),  also called  “oral instructions ” or “quintessential  
instructions, ” are practice  instructions  given  directly  by the guru  to the student  con­
cerning  meditation  on the nature  of mind.  While  some  of these  are written  down,  
many  are passed  on only  orally.
7. Fully  enlightened beings,  buddhas,  may manifest  in three ways:  through  the dhar-  
makaya,  which  can be perceived  only by other  enlightened  beings;  through  the 
sambhogakaya,  which  can be perceived  only  by advanced  bodhisattvas  in the pure  
lands; and through  the nirmanakaya,  which  can be perceived  by ordinary  beings,  for 
example,  those  who  perceived  the historical  Buddha  in our world.
8. When  we look  for the mind  and its characteristics,  we find nothing.  Yet the mind  
has awareness  and  cognition,  and  we call  this quality  “luminous  clarity ” (Tib.  salwa),  
or “luminosity, ” or “clarity. ”
9. Buddha  nature  (Skt.  sugatagarbha ) is a quality  that  is possessed  by all sentient  beings,  
and it is this quality  that allows  these  beings  (not  just human  beings)  to eventually  
reach  buddhahood.
1 o. In the Vajrayana  there  are two  stages  of  meditation:  the creation  and the completion  
stage.  The creation  stage  is a method  of tantric  meditation  that involves  visualiza ­
tion and contemplating  deities  for the purpose  of realizing  the purity  of all phe­
nomena.  In this  stage,  visualization  of the deity  is established  and maintained.  The

184 — NOTES
completion  stage  has two meanings:  first,  it can refer  to the dissolving  of  everything  
visualized  in the creation  stage,  leaving  the meditator  with  just his or her mind.  It 
can also refer to working  with the subtle  winds,  channels,  drops,  and the chakras  
during  the practice.
11. It is generally  accepted  that Nagarjuna,  who is the founder  of the Madhyamaka  
school,  lived  in the second  century  and Tilopa  lived  in the eleventh  century.  Some  
have explained  this anomaly  by saying  that the Nagarjuna  who met Tilopa was a 
different  person  from  the founder  of the Madhyamaka  school.  On the other  hand,  
Rinpoche  has also said that  mahasiddhas,  unlike  ordinary  beings,  have  the power  to 
appear  at different  times  and places.
i z. The display  of miracles  such as trees becoming  warriors  arises  from the samadhi  
recognizing  that all phenomena  are uncreated  and, in fact, illusory.  Whatever  is 
required  to benefit  beings  can be magically  manifested  out of  the samadhi  of  realiz ­
ing this emptiness. —Thrangu  Rinpoche
13. A spontaneous  arisen  form  usually  means  that the form  of  a deity  gradually  appears  
on a rock,  for example,  without  anyone  ever  touching  it. A heruka  indicates  that  the 
form  was of Chakrasamvara.
14. The “secret  Mantrayana ” is another  name  for tantric  teachings  in the Vajrayana.
15. Also,  see appendix  B for the disturbing  emotion  that  is purified  and  the wisdom  that 
results  when it  is purified  that is associated  with  each  of the five buddha  families.
16. In the actual  empowerment  that is still performed  to this day, the guru  puts a tea­
spoon of  liquor  or juice  in the palm  of the recipient  and then it is consumed.
x 7. The subtle  energy  travels  in the form  of  subtle  drops  through  subde  channels,  which  
are not anatomical  structures  but more  like acupuncture  meridians.  These  are all 
part  of  what  is called  the “vajra  body, ” and  in advanced  tantric  practices,  these  subtle  
channels  and energies  are purified  through  special  physical  exercises  and visualiza ­
tion techniques.
18. In the creation  stage  of a tantric  practice,  we visualize  the deity  and his or her sur­
rounding  retinue.  Then  after  the main  practice,  we engage  in the  completion  stage,  
where  we dissolve  everything  that we have visualized  into emptiness  and rest our 
mind  in that emptiness.  Luminous  clarity  creates  the visualization,  and the dissolv­
ing of it emphasizes  the emptiness  aspect  of all phenomena.
19. The three  heart  spheres  is actually  the tide of  a tantra  called  the Mahamudra  Subtle  
Drop  tantra.
10. The account  that Thrangu  Rinpoche  used  was from Pema  Karpo.  Sangyes  Nyenpa  
says that Pema  Karpos  biography  states  that  Tilopa  met Nagarjuna ’s female  disciple  
Matangi  when  he tried to find Nagarjuna.  Matangi  later  sent Tilopa to her friend  
Dharima  who was prostitute  who helped  Tilopa  reach  the last part of his path to 
enlightenment.  The other  accounts  of this event  imply  that Matangi  was a man,  
not a woman.
zi. Mahabrahma,  or the “Great  Brahma, ” is the same  as the Hindu  god Indra who is 
mentioned  in many  Buddhist  works.
zz. Thrangu  Rinpoche ’s teaching  in 1994  on the “marketplace  doha ” uses  a translation  of

NOTES  — 185
this  doha  by the Nalanda  Translation  Committee,  published  in The  Rain  of Wisdom  
(Boston:  Shambhala  Publications,  1980).
13. “Nakedly ” here  means  without  any preconception  or conceptualization,  like a baby  
looking  at a shrine  for the first time.
Z4. Tibetans  divided  the Madhyamaka,  or Middle  Way,  school  into two major  schools.  
The Rangtong  school  follows  the teachings  of Nagarjuna  fairly  closely  and main ­
tains  that  everything  is empty  of itself,  whereas the Shentong  school  maintains  that 
although  the nature  of mind  lacks  substantiality,  its emptiness  is indivisible  from  
luminous  clarity  and that all sentient  beings  possess  this buddha  essence.
z$. Being  “unborn ” means  that it has always  been  there  since  beginningless  time.
z6. The word  “nature, ” also called  “essence, ” has a technical  meaning  in Buddhism.  For 
example,  solid  ice, a flowing  stream,  and steam  have  entirely  different  appearances  
and  characteristics,  but they  all have  the same  “nature ” as water,  or in scientific  terms,  
H20. Similarly,  all the different  thoughts,  feelings,  and  memories  are various  appear ­
ances,  or events,  of the mind,  while  the actual  essence  or “nature ” of the mind  is 
emptiness,  without  any of these  appearances  clouding  it.
17. The whispered  lineage  is the pith instructions  given  by a teacher  to the student  on 
how  to do a practice  that are not usually  found  in the practice  texts.
z8. The first  quality  is having  perfect  samaya,  the second  is having  received  a prophecy  
of  ones  future  enlightenment,  and the third  is having  developed  a deep  level  of  real­
ization.  Tilopa,  being  an emanation  of Chakrasamvara,  has automatically  fulfilled  
the second  and third  prophecies.
19. In the Vajrayana,  there  are two  paths —the path  of  liberation  (Tib.  drol  lam)  and  the 
path  of  ripening  (Tib.  tbap  lam)—that  are generally  followed  either  simultaneously  
or alternately  by the practitioner.  The path of  liberation  is sometimes  referred to as 
“formless  meditation ” and includes  Mahamudra.  In this approach  to meditation,  
one relates  to the  mind  in terms  of the awareness  aspect  of mind.
30. Tilopa  passed  these  teachings,  called  “the nine formless  dakinis, ” to Naropa,  who 
lived  in India.  Naropa  then  passed  them  to Marpa,  who  took  them  to Tibet.  Accord­
ing to Tsangnyon  Heruka,  who  wrote  Milarepas  spiritual  biography,  Marpa  passed  
on only  four  of them  to his student  Milarepa.  Rechungpa,  Milarepas  disciple,  then 
received  the other  five teachings  from  Bharima  in Nepal  and  from  Tiphupa  in India  
and transmitted  them  to Milarepa.
31. For example,  at one point  Tilopa  staked  out a cloth that was soiled.  He then lit 
it, and the cloth burned  up, leaving  only  the carbon  threads  of the warp  and woof  
behind.  He then asked  Naropa  what this meant,  and Naropa  said, “I understand  
that  the Gurus  illuminating  understanding  and instructions,  which  are like fire, and 
this fire burns  the disciples  emotional  instability,  which  is like cotton  cloth.  Thereby  
the belief  in the solid  reality  of  an external  object  is destroyed,  and since  this sort of 
belief  about  reality is no longer  effective,  there  is no return to worldliness. ”
3Z. At that time,  when  taking  refuge  in the Buddha,  the disciples  hair was completely  
shaved  off. Today, those  receiving  ordination  shave  their  hair  but householders  usu­
ally have  just a few strands  of hair cut off.

i86 NOTES
33. There  are many  different  translations  of  the Ganges  Mahamudra,  and while  they  all 
have  the same  material,  some  versions  have  the verses  in a different  order.  The num­
bering  of  the verses  may  also  be different —for example,  David  Molk  s translation  of 
the root  text in Sangye  Nyenpas  commentary  on the Ganges  Mahamudra  combines  
our verses  8a, 8b and 9 into just verse  8. See Sangye  Nyenpa,  Tilopas  Mahamudra  
Upadesha:  The Gangama  Instructions  with Commentary , trans.  David  Molk  (Bos ­
ton: Snow  Lion,  20x4).
34. There  are two English  translations:  Mahamudra:  The Quintessence  of  Mind  and 
Meditation,  trans.  Lobsang  P. Lhalungpa  (Boston:  Shambhala  Publications,  1986)  
and  Moonbeams  of Mahamudra,  trans.  Elizabeth  M. Callahan  (Boulder,  CO:  Snow  
Lion,  1019).
35. Thrangu  Rinpoche  has given  an extensive  commentary  on this work  in his Essen ­
tials  of Mahamudra:  Looking  Directly  at the Mind  (Boston:  Wisdom  Publications,  
2004).
3 6. The ten bodhisattva  levels  are ten stages  that  a bodhisattva  goes  through  on the path  
to enlightenment.  It begins  with  the first  level  called  “Joy, ” which  is the first  realiza ­
tion of emptiness,  and through  this, he or she achieves the perfection  of  generosity.  
He or she then  continues  up to the tenth  level,  which  is complete  enlightenment.
37. In fact, these teachings  were originally  translated  from the Bengali  language  of 
Apabhramsha,  not Sanskrit.
3 8. Ignorance  as used  in Buddhist  texts  is one of  the three  main  disturbing  emotions.  It 
does not mean  “not knowing  something ” in general  but rather it refers  specifically  
to not realizing  the empty  nature of  phenomena.
39. These  are explained  in detail  in Naropas  biography.  See Herbert  Guenther,  The  Life 
and Teachings ofNaropa  (Oxford:  Oxford  University  Press,  1963) and Khenchen  
Thrangu,  Naropas  Wisdom:  His Life  and Teaching  on Mahamudra  (Boulder,  CO:  
Snow  Lion,  forthcoming).
40. This definition  of “space ” is actually  a description  of “ether, ” which  has been part 
of philosophy  and physics  in Asia, and also in Western  civilization  since Aristo-  
de. Western  philosophy  and science  abandoned  the concept  of  ether  because  of an 
experiment  performed  by Albert  Michelson and Edward  Morley  in 1887.
41. There is a distinction  between  thoughts  and feelings  and the mind ’s original  nature  
(Tib.  sem nyi), which  is how the mind  has always  been without  all its thoughts,  
confusion,  and disturbing  emotions.  Usually,  this distinction  is described  in terms  
of thoughts being  like waves  on the surface  of a great  ocean  and the original  mind  
as being  the ocean.
42. The word  “nature ” (Skt.  svabhava,  Tib. ngowo ) is also translated  as “essence. ” See 
n. 2 6.
43. In Indian  mythology,  a wish-fulfilling  jewel  has the power  to grant  a person  any­
thing  that they  want.  In Buddhism,  it is used as a metaphor  for the fact that once  
one has achieved  complete enlightenment, one has achieved  everything  that there  
is to achieve.

NOTES  — 187
44. These  eighteen  characteristics  are the eight  forms  of leisure  and  the ten endowments.  
These  are described  more  folly  in the glossary;  see under  “eight  forms  of  leisure ” and 
“ten endowments. ”
45. There  are sixteen  kinds  are emptiness  (Skt.  shunyata,  Tib. tongpa  nyi): (1) Empti­
ness of internal  phenomena.  This is the emptiness  of the body,  which  is constandy  
changing  and renewing.  (2) Emptiness  of external  phenomena.  Outer  phenomena  
are constandy  changing  and have  no substantial  reality.  (3) Emptiness  of  both  inter ­
nal and external  phenomena.  External  objects  are perceived  and become  internal  
images,  and  the relationship  between  the two is not a solid,  unchanging  connection.  
(4) Emptiness  of emptiness.  This is the emptiness  of everything,  what  is normally  
referred  to as emptiness  in Buddhist  texts. (5) Emptiness  of the great.  This is the 
emptiness  that pervades  in all directions.  (6) Emptiness  of the ultimate.  This is 
emptiness  of nirvana,  which  is ultimate  reality.  (7). Emptiness  of composite phe­
nomena.  Everything  that is compounded,  that  can be broken  into smaller  parts,  is a 
composite  phenomenon,  and these  are also empty.  (8) Emptiness  of noncomposite  
phenomena.  Noncomposite  phenomena  are things  that  don ’t arise  or cease;  they  are 
also empty.  (9) Emptiness  of that  which is beyond extremes.  The emptiness  of the 
two extremes,  or limitations,  of externalism  and nihilism,  or samsara  and nirvana.  
(10) Emptiness  of that which  has no beginning  or end. Samsara  is said to have no 
beginning  (we cannot  discover  when  it began)  and no end (there  is no time  when  
it will end),  (n) Emptiness  of that  which  is not to be abandoned.  The Dharma  and 
the path  to enlightenment  should  never  be abandoned,  yet they  are empty  too. (12) 
Emptiness  of true nature.  The true nature  of reality  is also empty.  The Rangtong  
school  uses this emptiness  to refote  the Shentong position.  (13) Emptiness  of all 
phenomena.  All external  phenomena,  the contact  with the sense  organs,  the sense  
organs  themselves,  and the sensory  consciousness  are also empty.  (14) Emptiness  of 
defining  characteristics.  All composite  and noncomposite  phenomena  have  charac ­
teristics,  but these  characteristics  themselves  are also empty.  (15) Emptiness  of the 
imperceptible.  The past  and the future  don ’t exist,  and the present  is only  a minute,  
fleeting  moment  so nothing  is apprehendable.  (16) Emptiness  that is the absence  
of entities.  Since  everything  arises  from  cause  and effect,  there  cannot  be anything  
that arises  as a composite.
46. “Adventitious ” means  that it is not an inherent  part  of mind.  The example  given  to 
illustrate  this is that if gold is buried  under  a lot of dirt, the dirt does not become  
part  of the gold.  Therefore  the dirt is adventitious,  “not part  of” the gold.
47. The Buddha  rejected  the idea that the world  and everything  that happens  in it is 
due to the influence  of God  or gods,  rather  he said that everything  is created  and 
changed  due to cause  and effect.  This is called  “interdependent  origination ” (Tib.  
tendril).  One  event  causes  another  event,  that causes  another  event,  without  there  
being  any interference  of a creator.
48. The second  part of this verse (verse  8b) concerns  conduct  and is discussed  in the 
next  chapter.

l88 — NOTES
49. The Four Dharma  Seals are (1) all compounded  things  are impermanent,  (2.) all 
emotions  are painful,  (3) all phenomena  are without  inherent  existence,  and (4) 
nirvana  is beyond  description.
50. The seven  dharmas of Vairochana  are (1) straighten  the upper  body  and the spinal  
column,  (2) look  slightly  downward  into space  straight  across  from the tip of the 
nose  while  keeping  the chin and neck  straight,  (3) straighten  the shoulder  blades  in 
the manner  of a vulture  flexing  its wings,  (4) keep the lips touching  gently,  (5) let 
the tip of the tongue touch  the upper  palate,  (6), form the legs into either  the foil 
lotus  or the diamond  posture,  and (7) keep  the back  of  the right  hand  flat on the left 
open  palm  with  the inside  of the tips of  the thumbs  gently  touching.
51. The four  common  preliminaries  are explained  in detail  in Thrangu  Rinpoche,  Four  
Foundations  of Buddhist  Practice  (Boulder,  CO:  Namo  Buddha  Publications,  2018).
52. This refers  primarily to believing  that our mind,  external  phenomena,  and our self 
exist as real, solid  objects,  whereas  they are actually  empty,  and believing  that the 
emptiness,  or the insubstantiality,  of  mind  and phenomena  do not exist,  when  they 
actually  do exist.
5 3. The  six perfections  (Skt.paramitas)  are transcendent  generosity,  transcendent  disci­
pline,  transcendent  patience,  transcendent  exertion,  transcendent  meditation,  and 
transcendent  knowledge  (prajna ). Each  perfection  is “transcendent ” because  it goes 
far beyond,  or transcends,  our ordinary  generosity,  discipline,  patience,  exertion,  
meditation,  and knowledge.
54. The ten virtuous  deeds  are (x) not destroying  life, (2) not taking  what  has not been  
given,  (3) refraining  from  improper  sexual conduct,  (4) not telling  a falsehood,  (5) 
not using  abusive  language, (6) not  slandering  others,  (7) not indulging  in irrelevant  
talk, (8) not being  covetous  of others  property  or power,  (9) not being  malicious,  
and (10) not holding  false or destructive  beliefs.  The ten unvirtuous  deeds  are vio­
lating  any of the ten virtuous  deeds.
The five actions  of immediate  result  are (1) intentionally  killing  ones  father,  (2) 
intentionally  killing  ones  mother,  (3) killing  an enlightened  being,  (4) shedding  the 
blood  of a bodhisattva,  and (5) creating  a schism  within  the sangha  (the commu ­
nity of Buddhist  practitioners).  These  five actions  are deeds  that lead to one going  
directly  to the lower  realms  upon  death.  These  come  from  The Sutra  Preached  by the 
Buddha  on the Total  Extinction  of the Dharma.
5 5. Every  action  that a person  does  creates karmic  imprints  or latencies  (Tib.  bakchak)  
that  are stored  in the eighth  consciousness.  Later,  when  stimulated  by the appropri ­
ate external  experience,  the karma  of these  latencies  express  themselves,  leaving  the 
eighth  consciousness  and entering  the sixth  consciousness.
56. The selflessness  of  persons  is the fact that  persons  are not solid  entities  because  they 
are constantly  changing.  This was taught  mainly  by the Buddha.  The selflessness  
of phenomena,  or simply  emptiness,  is that all external  objects  are also insubstan ­
tial, and this is emphasized  mostly  in the Mahayana  teachings.  Thrangu  Rinpoche  
explains  this in detail  in The Open  Door  to Emptiness  (Glastonbury,  CT: Namo  
Buddha  Publications,  2012).

NOTES  — 189
5 7. In many  other  texts,  Thrangu  Rinpoche  points  out that  the Tibetan  word  for “med­
itation ” is sgom  (pronounced “gom ”) and the word  for “getting  used  to” or “habitu­
ated ” isgoms  (pronounced  “khom ”), making  these  words  sound  very  similar.
5 8. For English  translations  of the compilation  of the lives  of the eighty-four  mahasid-
dhas  by Abhayadatta,  see the entries  under  Abhayadatta  in the bibliography.
59. The six realms  are traditionally  said to be the three  higher  realms —god, jealous  
god, and human  realms —and the three  lower  realms —animal,  hungry  ghost,  and 
hell realms.  There  are many  more  different  realms  than these that are invisible  to 
ordinary  persons.
60. Indian  Buddhist  texts  were  brought  to Tibet  and  translated  into  Tibetan  during  two 
different  periods.  The first was during  the seventh  century,  when  Guru  Rinpoche  
brought  texts  from  India  and had them  translated  into  Tibetan.  The second  wave  of 
translations,  referred  to as the “new  translation  tradition ” (Tib.  sarma ), introduced  
new  teachings  and translations  into  Tibet  in the eleventh  century.
61. Beginningless  time refers  to the fact that one can go back to one ’s previous  incar ­
nation,  and then back  to the next earliest  incarnation,  and back  and back  without  
any beginning.
6 2. Thrangu  Rinpoche  follows  the Third  Karmapa,  who  divided  the eighth  (alaya)  con­
sciousness  into the storehouse  consciousness,  which  stores  all of ones karma,  and 
the all-basis  consciousness,  which  holds the other  seven  consciousnesses  together.
63. Upaya  (skillful  means)  here refers  to the various  tantric  techniques  to develop  bliss  
in union  with wisdom  (Skt.  prajna ), which  is the wisdom  developed  using  these  
techniques.
64. Karmamudra  is the use of sexual  activity  between  a man  and  woman  to generate  bliss 
and  emptiness.  The  bliss  and  emptiness  generated  in this practice  is much  more  than  
an orgasm  and lasts for a much  longer  period  of time.  The danger  with engaging  in 
this practice  is that  the partners  might  become  attached  to each  other  and then the 
practice  would  no longer  be a meditational  practice.
6 5. The  ten powers  are knowing  (1) what  is and isn’t possible,  (1) the results  of  actions,  (3) 
the aspirations  of  human  beings,  (4) the elements,  (5) the powers  of  human  beings,  
(6) the path  that  leads  everywhere,  (7) the origin  of  disturbing  emotions, (8) previ ­
ous lives,  (9) transference  and death,  and (10) that ones  defilements  are exhausted.
66. The  four  fearlessnesses  are that  one is not  afraid  to (1) assert  ones  perfect  realization,  
(2) assert  ones  having  abandoned  all faults,  (3) reveal  the path  to liberation,  and (4) 
reveal  obstacles  on the path.
67. Karl  Brunnholzl  explains  in his Straight  from  the Heart:  Buddhist  Pith  Instructions  
(Ithaca,  NY: Snow  Lion Publications,  2007),  508^59,  that one edition is from  the 
Tibetan  Tengyur  and the other,  the one that Thrangu  Rinpoche  used,  is from a 
collection  of  Kagyu  works  that  was  published  by the Sixteenth  Karmapa  in Rumtek.
68. Tib.phungpo,  kham , kye  che.  The five  psychophysical  “aggregates, ” the eighteen  “ele­
ments ” of sensory  perception,  and the twelve  “bases ” of  sensory  perception.
69. This  translation  is available  at www.dharmasanctuary.org/ pdf/Doha_Treasures.pdf , 
last accessed  March  22,2019.

190 NOTES
70. This  description  of  the eight  consciousnesses  is taken  from  Thrangu  Rinpoche,  The 
Five  Buddha  Families  and  the  Eight  Consciousnesses  (Glastonbury,  CT: Namo  Bud­
dha Publications,  1013).  Used  with  permission.

Annotated  Bibliography
Tantras
Mahamudra  Subtle  Drop  Tantra  (Skt.  Mahamudratilaka , Tib.  Phyagchen thigle ) 
This tantra  has not been  translated  into English.
Other  Works  
Abhayadatta
Buddhas  Lions:  The  Lives  of the  Eighty-Four  Siddhas.  Translated  by James  B. Robin ­
son. Berkeley,  CA: Dharma  Publishing,  1979.  Also  translated  as Masters  of Enchant ­
ment: The Lives  and Legends  of  the Mahasiddhas.  Translated  by Keith  Dowman.  
Rochester,  VT: Inner  Traditions,  1989.
Translations  of the original  text on the eighty-four  siddhas  collected  by Abha ­
yadatta,  an Indian  scholar  in the twelfth  century.  The translation  by Dowman  also 
includes a large  amount  of additional  information  on the mahasiddhas.
Brunnholzl,  Karl
Straightfrom  the Heart:  Buddhist  Pith Instructions.  Ithaca,  NY: Snow  Lion Publi ­
cations,  1007.
Translations  of  various  pith instructions  of the Kagyu  lineage, including  a trans­
lation  of Tilopas  Ganges  Mahamudra  that includes a comparison of the two major  
Tibetan  versions  of this doha —one in the Tibetan  Kangyur  and the other  in the 
Kagyu  lineage.
Chandrakirti
Introduction  to the Middle  Way (Skt.  Madhyamakavatard).  Translated  by the Pad-  
makara  Translation Group.  Boston:  Shambhala  Publications, 2004.
One of most  celebrated  Indian  works  on the study  of emptiness.  It is written  in 
verse  and has ten chapters  describing  each of the bodhisattva  levels.  Tibetan  Bud­
dhists  regard it as being  the most  authoritative  text of the Madhyamaka  Prasangika  
view. This book  has a translation  of the root text and a commentary  by Mipham  
Rinpoche.

192 . ANNOTATED  BIBLIOGRAPHY
Dakpo  Tashi  Namgyal
Phyag  chen zla ba i od zer. English  translation:  Mahamudra:  The Quintessence  of 
Mind  and  Meditation.  Translated  by Lobsang  P. Lhalungpa.  Boston:  Shambhala  
Publications,  1986. Also  Moonbeams  of Mahamudra.  Translated  by Elizabeth  M. 
Callahan.  Boulder,  CO: Snow  Lion, 1019.
A classic  book  covering  all aspects  of  Mahamudra  meditation  in great  detail.
Dorje  Dze Od
The Great  Kagyu  Masters.  Translated  by Khenpo  Konchog  Gyaltsen.  Ithaca,  NY: 
Snow  Lion  Publications,  1990.
A compilation of the lives  of the Kagyu  masters  from  the Drikung  Kagyu  tradi ­
tion.  The retelling  of  Tilopa  s life included  here is mostly  in accord  with  the biogra ­
phy used  by Thrangu  Rinpoche.
Gendun  Choephel  (1903-1951)
The White  Annals.  Translated  by Samten  Norboo.  Dharamsala,  India:  Library  of 
Tibetan  Works and  Archives,  1978.
An unfinished  history  of  Tibet  by a brilliant  Tibetan  writer  who  often  took  a view  
contrary  to the traditional  Tibetan  Buddhist  view.
Guenther,  Herbert
The  Life  and Teaching  of Naropa.  Oxford:  Oxford  University  Press,  1963.
One of the few translations  of the biography  of Tilopa  s student  Naropa.  It also 
contains  information  on Tilopa  as well.
Hoffman,  Helmut
The  Religions  of  Tibet.  Translated  by Edward  Fitzgerald.  Westport,  CT: Greenwood  
Press,  1961.
Jackson,  Roger
Tantric  Treasures.  Oxford:  Oxford  University  Press,  2004.
Contains  a translation of three  dohas,  including  Tilopas  Doha  Kosha,  translated  
from the original  Apabhramsha  language  of  Bengal.
Khenchen  Thrangu  Rinpoche
Essentials  of Mahamudra:  Looking  Directly  at the Mind.  Boston:  Wisdom  Publica­
tions,  2004.
An extremely  detailed  description  of Mahamudra  meditation —Thrangu  Rin­
poche  s commentary  on Dakpo  Tashi  Na  mgy  al’s Moon  beams  ofMahamudra,  which  
Rinpoche  gave over  five summers in Big Bear,  California.
The Five  Buddha  Families  and the Eight  Consciousnesses.  Glastonbury,  CT: Namo  
Buddha  Publications, 2013.

ANNOTATED  BIBLIOGRAPHY
Explanations  of the five buddha  families  in terms  of their  connections  with the 
five aggregates,  five types  of disturbing  emotion,  and  five buddha  wisdoms
Four  Foundations  of Buddhist  Practice.  Boulder,  CO: Namo  Buddha  Publications,  
2.018.
An extensive  explanation  of  the four  common  preliminaries,  also  called  the “four 
turnings  of the mind, ” which  are four  contemplations  one should engage  in before  
beginning  any Dharma  practice.
Naropas  Wisdom:  His  Life  and  Teachings  on Mahamudra.  Boulder,  CO:  Snow  Lion,  
forthcoming.
Teachings on Naropas  life and on some  of  his dohas on Mahamudra.
The Open  Door  to Emptiness.  Glastonbury,  CT: Namo  Buddha Publications,  2.011.
A careful  examination  of emptiness,  one of the more  difficult  concepts  in Bud­
dhism,  which  uses simple,  straightforward  examples  and  explanations.
Pointing  Out  the  Dharmakaya:  Teachings  on the Ninth  Karmapa ’s Text.  Ithaca,  NY: 
Snow  Lion  Publications,  1003.
One of the Ninth  Karmapa ’s three major  works  on Mahamudra  meditation.  
The commentary  is by Thrangu  Rinpoche  and  was orally  translated  by Lama  Yeshe  
Gyamtso.
The  Spiritual  Song  ofLodro  Thaye.  Auckland,  New  Zealand:  Zhyisil  Chokyi  Ghatsal,  
2008.
A translation  ofjamgon  Kongtruls  273-verse  spiritual  song  on the ground,  path,  
and fruition  of Mahamudra  with  Thrangu  Rinpoches  line-by-line  commentary.  It 
was translated  by Sarah  Harding  and Cornelia  Weishaar-Gunter.
Maitreya
The Uttaratantra  (Skt. Mahayana  Uttaratantra-shastra;  also known  as Ratnago-  
travibhaga )
One of five transmissions  from  the Buddha  Maitreya  received  by Asanga  in the 
fourth  century  CE. This  text consists  of 404  verses  mainly  on the subject  of buddha  
nature  and the development  of the realization  of the nature  of  phenomena  through  
the purification  of the disturbing  emotions.  The root text and a commentary  by 
Thrangu  Rinpoche  can be found  in The Uttaratantra:  A Treatise  on Buddha-Essence  
(Auckland, New  Zealand:  Zhyisil  Chokyi Ghatsal,  2003).
Marpa,  Chokyi  Lodro
The Life of  the Mahasiddha  Tilopa.  Translated  by Fabrizio  Torricelli  and Sangye  
Naga.  Dharamsala,  India:  Library of  Tibetan  Works  and Archives,  1995.
A translation  of the earliest  known  biography  of  Tilopa,  which  was composed  by— 193

194 ANNOTATED  BIBLIOGRAPHY
Marpa.  This book  also includes  the Tibetan  text, extensive  notes,  and a review  of 
eight  different  spiritual  biographies  written  about  Tilopa.
Michelson,  A., and  E. Morley
“On the Relative  Motion  of  the Earth  and the Luminiferous  Ether. ” American Jour­
nal  of Science  34, no. 203 (1887):  333-45.
The findings  of an experiment  that  ended  almost  two thousand  years  of  Western  
scientists and  philosophers  believing  in the existence  of the ether.
Nalanda  Translation Committee,  trans.
The Rain  of Wisdom.  Boston:  Shambhala  Publications,  1980.
A collection  of spiritual  songs by the Kagyu  lineage  masters,  which  includes  the 
“Marketplace  Doha ” by Tilopa.
The  Life  of Tilopa.  In Religions  of Tibet  in Practice , edited  by Donald  Lopez,  137—56. 
Princeton,  NJ: Princeton  University  Press,  2004.
A summary  of  Tilopa  s life and a translation  of  Pema  Karpo  s Pekar  Chojung  (His ­
tory  of the Dharma).
Patrul  Rinpoche
The Words  of My Perfect  Teacher.  Translated  by the Padmakara  Translation  Group.  
Boston:  Shambhala  Publications,  1998.
An excellent  summary  of the Dharma  from  a Tibetan  viewpoint.
Pema  Karpo
Pekar  Chojung  (History  of the Dharma)
The root text that Thrangu  Rinpoche  used for his commentary  on the life of 
Tilopa.  It has been  translated  into English  by the Nalanda  Translation Committee  
as The  Life  of  Tilopa.  See above  under  Nalanda  Translation  Committee.
Rangjung  Dorje,  The Third  Gyalwa  Karmapa
Aspirational  Prayer for Mahamudra.  Translated  by John  Rockwell.  Boulder,  CO:  
Namo  Buddha  Publications,  2001.
A prayer  aspiring  to achieve  Mahamudra.  It also  gives  a brief  outline  of the path.  
This  translation  includes a commentary  by Thrangu Rinpoche.
Roberts,  Peter  Alan,  trans.
Mahamudra  and  Related  Instructions : Core Teachings  of the Kagyu  Schools.  Somer­
ville,  MA:  Wisdom  Publications,  2011.
Sangyes  Nyenpa
Tilopa ’s Mahamudra  Upadesha:  The Gangama  Instructions  with Commentary.  
Translated  by David  Molk.  Boston:  Snow  Lion,  2014.

ANNOTATED  BIBLIOGRAPHY 195
A translation  of the root  verses  of Tilopa ’s Ganges  Mahamudra  with  a commen ­
tary by Sangyes  Nyenpa.  Also  includes  a translation  of The Golden  Garland  of the 
Kagyu  by Rangjung  Dorje,  which  is a commentary  on the Ganges  Mahamudra,  and 
A Brief  Account  ofTilopa  andNaropa  by Gampopa.
Saraha
A Song  for  the King:  Saraha  on Mahamudra  Meditation.  Edited  by Michele  Martin.  
Boston: Wisdom  Publications,  2006.
1116 shortest  of the three  doha  cycles  on Mahamudra  by Saraha.  This  volume  has 
an extensive  commentary  by Thrangu  Rinpoche,  edited  by Michele  Martin  from  
oral translation  by Peter  O’Hearn  (Lama  Yeshe  Gyamtso).
Shantideva
The Way of the Bodhisattva  (Skt. Bodhicharyavatara ). 2nd rev. ed. Boulder,  CO:  
Shambhala  Publications,  2006.
One  of the most  widely  read Mahayana  texts  describing  how  to conduct  oneself  
as a bodhisattva.  See Thrangu  Rinpoche,  Shantideva ’s “A Guide  to the  Bodhisattva ’s 
Way  of Life"  (Dharamsala,  India:  Library  of Tibetan  Works  and  Archives,  2016)  for 
a commentary  on this text along  with  a translation of Shantideva ’s root text.
Tilopa
The Oral  Instructions  of the Six Yogas  (Saddharmo  Padesha).  In The  Practice  of the Six 
Yogas  ofNaropa , translated  by Glenn  Mullin,  23-30.  Ithaca,  NY: Snow  Lion Publi ­
cations,  1997.
Contains  a translation  of this work by Tilopa,  as well as the Six Dharmas  of 
Naropa  and several  commentaries  on Naropa ’s text.
“The  Tanjur  Text  of Tilopa ’s Dohdkosa ” Translated  by Fabrizio  Torricelli.  The Tibet  
Journal  22, no. x (1997):  35-57.
Contains  a translation  of “Tilopa ’s Treasure  of Songs, ” a thirty-seven-verse  doha  
by Tilopa.
Torricelli, Fabrizio
“Chos  drug  and bKa ’-babs  bzhi  Material  for a Biography  of  the Siddha  Tilopa. ” East  
and  West  43, no. 1/4 (1993):  185-98.
Provides  extensive  materials  on the different  transmissions  that Tilopa  received  
and also information  on the Six Dharmas  ofTilopa.
Tsangnyon Heruka
The  Hundred  Thousand  Songs  ofMilarepa:  A New  Translation.  Translated  by Chris ­
topher  Stagg.  Boulder,  CO: Shambhala  Publications,  2016.
An excellent  translation  of many of Milarepa ’s spiritual  songs.  Milarepa  was 
one of the greatest  Buddhist  saints to live in Tibet,  and his incredible  story of

196 — ANNOTATED  BIBLIOGRAPHY
accomplishing  enlightenment  is one of the truly  inspirational  stories  in Buddhism.  
He taught  almost  all his profound  teachings in the form  of spiritual  songs.
The Life of  Milarepa . Translated  by Lobsang  P. Lhalungpa.  New York: Penguin  
Books,  1977.
Many  of Milarepas  songs are collected  and beautifully  translated  in this book.  
Vasubandhu
The Treasury  ofAbhidharma  (Skt.  Abhidharmakosha)
A summary  of  the Abhidharma  that  is studied  in many  Tibetan  Buddhist  monas ­
teries.  Available  in English as Abhidharmakoiabhasyam.  Translated  by Louis de La 
Vallee  Poussin.  English  translation  by Leo  M. Pruden.  Berkeley,  CA:  Asian  Human ­
ities Press,  1991.
Wangchuk  Gyaltsen  (b. 1317)
“The Life of Tilopa. ” Unpublished  manuscript.  Translated  by Ives  Waldo.
An English  translation  of one of the three  important  biographies  of Tilopa.

Index
Abhayadatta,  x, 1891158  
Abhidharmakosha,  76 
Abhidharma-pitaka,  108 
accumulation  of merit  and wisdom,  22, 87 
Action  Seal, 147 
Adzom Rinpoche,  xi 
afflicted  (seventh)  consciousness,  164 
aggression
cutting  the bonds  of, 113-14  
teachings  on remedies  for, 108 
agitation
calming  with  luminous  clarity,  73-74  
common  siddhi  for easing,  149 
in meditation,  144,146-47  
Akshobhya,  13,161
alertness,  importance  of, 61,95,110,130,146  
all-accomplishing  wisdom,  161 
all-basis,  as unborn,  141 
all-basis  (eighth)  consciousness,  77,141,  
164, i88n55, 189062  
all-pervasive  suffering,  116 
Amitabha,  13,161  
Amoghasiddhi,  13,162  
anger
looking  directly  at, 71,140  
wisdom  nature  of, 161 
antidote,  turning  emptiness  into, 136 
appearances
emptiness  as remedy  for fixation  on, 79 
ignorance  of being  enthralled  with,  119 
leaving  as they  are, 131,139,140-41,142  
luminous  clarity  and, 153 
unity  with  emptiness,  81 
See also external  objects  
arhat,  112,151
Aspirational  Prayerfor  Mabamudra  
(Rangjung  Dorje),  70,80,94attachment
to a conceptual  view,  102 
cutting  the bonds  of, 123-24  
teachings  on remedies  for, 108 
attentiveness,  mindfulness  and, 104,145,  
153
austerities  and hardships,  understanding,  
63-65  
awakening
attainment  of unsurpassable,  72,92,  
95-96,111
in one lifetime,  21,18,58,128-29  
two different  methods  for, x 
awareness  (rikpa ) 
not being  distracted  from,  110-11  
as opposite  of ignorance,  118 
resting  in naked,  137-39 
techniques  for increasing,  145-47  
temporary  experiences  that  veil, 138
benefiting  beings  
compassion  and, 5,59 
supreme  nirmanakaya  for, 59 
Bhagavati,  32-34  
Biography  ofMilarepa,  zz 
blessings  
devotion  and, 63 
of  guru,  117-18,119  
bliss
nature  of mind  and, 77 
as veil of  awareness,  138 
bliss-emptiness  
attainment  of, 14 
Karmamudra  and, 147-48  
bodhisattvas  
realization  of, 112 
ten levels  of, 60,122,151,  i86n36

198 — INDEX
body.  See physical  body; physical  posture  
breath
applying  techniques  of, 144,145-46  
in meditation,  90,93  
buddha  family,  161 
buddha  nature
buddhahood  and, 5,78,118,18309  
full recognition  of, 117-18  
luminous  clarity  and, 79-80,85  
Mahamudra  view  of, 14-17  
sesame  oil metaphor  for, 10-14  
Buddha  Shakyamuni  
brief  history  of, 59 
buddha  nature  and, 118 
commentaries  on teachings  of, 58 
enlightenment  of, 135,151  
as supreme  nirmanakaya,  4,59,18307  
teachings  of, ix, 4,84-85,107-8,116  
buddhahood  
austerities  and, 64
familiarization  with  mind  s nature  and, 
111
as meaningful  pursuit,  119
in one lifetime,  11,18,58,115,118-19,  i?5
recognizing  luminous  clarity  and,
79-80
relying  on a guru  for, 116,118
cause  and effect  
Buddhas  teachings  on, ix 
realization  of  wisdom  and, 10 
Chakrasamvara,  4-5,30,31,34,184013,
i85ni8
Chakrasamvara  tantra,  6,14,15  
Chandrakirti,  131 
Chenrezik,  5
clear  light,  80,8z. See also luminous  clarity  
commitments  (samaya),  of Mahamudra  
as being  free of  location  or focus  of 
mind,  104-5  
as free of  extremes,  107 
of maintaining  awareness  of mind ’s 
nature,  105 
meaning  of, 101,103  
to specific  practices,  103 
view  of Mahamudra  and, 101-1  
without  conceptualization,  103-4  
compassion
benefiting  beings and, 5,59 
buddha  bodies  and, 4conceptual fabrications,  of emptiness,  136 
conceptual fixation  
gurus  blessings  for liberating,  118 
samaya  and, 103-4  
samsara  and, 108-9  
stripping  mind  of, 137-38  
transcending,  110,141,143  
conduct
acting  in accordance  to customs, 98-99  
of  Mahamudra,  89-91,91  
monarch  of  all, 111,141,143  
confidence
importance  of, 63-64,118  
in recognition,  119-30  
Consequence  (Prasangika)  school,  11 
conventional  reality  
fruition  of  path and, 151 
Heart  Sutra  on, 78 
Mahamudra  view  of, 77 
mind  and, 76,77
creation  and completion  stages,  6, i83nio,  
i84ni8
joining  with  Mahamudra,  109 
Tilopas  practice  of, 11-13,  H-I5
dakinis,  Tilopas  teachings  from,  11-13,  
19-34
Dakpo  Tashi  Namgyal,  55,95,146,153
dark  retreat,  56
De Je Gawa,  40
dedication  and aspiration,  150
deities
creation  stage  and, 6,11-13,  i83nio  
as dharmata,  5
spontaneously  arisen  form  of, 11,184013  
delight,  spiritual  songs  and, 17-18  
desire
taking  as the path, 147,189064  
wisdom  nature  of, 161 
devotion  
blessings  and, 117 
immediate  benefit  of, 63 
true function of,  63-64  
Dharima.xi,  16-17,19,184010  
Dharma
Buddhas  expression  of profundity  of, 135 
power  and effectiveness  of, 11 
turnings  of  wheel  of, 11,13,59,84-85  
vast teachings  of, 4,108,116  
of  whispered  lineage,  30,31,185017

INDEX 199
dharmadhatu,  iz8, 161 
dharmakaya,  18307  
compassion  and, 4 
guru  pointing  out, 10 
instructions  from  lineage  of, 32.-33  
Vajradhara  as, 59 
dharmata  
deities  and, 5
direct  experience  of, 33,137  
of mind  beyond  extremes,  94 
wisdom  of, 161 
wisdom  that recognizes,  118 
diligence
commitment  and, 103 
confidence  and, 63,118  
direct  experience  
of dharmata,  33,137  
of emptiness,  21-22,2.6,27,74,131  
as “leaping ” past intellect,  91 
of  nature  of mind,  131 
uncommon  view  and, 62, 67-68,71  
discriminating  wisdom,  i6z 
distraction,  10$ 
how  to abandon,  izz-z7  
maintaining  awareness  beyond,  120- 
zi, 146
disturbing  emotions  
as adventitious  stains,  81 
cutting  the bonds  of, 123-24  
as distinct from  original  mind,  69-70,  
74,186041  
emptiness  of, 23 
liberation  from,  20,109  
looking  direcdy  at nature  of, 71-71,96,  
113,131-32,137,140  
mental suffering  and, 73 
resting  in unborn  nature  and, 141-42  
self-liberation  of, 27 
sense  perceptions  and, 163 
suffering  and, 126
three  vehicles* different  approaches  to, 
139-40
Vinaya  remedies  for, 108 
Doha  Treasure,  The (Tilopa),  158-59  
dohas  (spiritual  songs)  
great  value  of, 27-28,58  
importance  ofTilopas,  58-61  
spontaneous composition  of, xiii, 68 
Tilopas  marketplace  doha,  19-28  
Dorje Dze Od, xiiidreams  and magical  illusions,  mundane  
things  as, 123,124  
Drime  Lingpa,  94 
Dzogchen,  56,94
echo  metaphor,  for conduct  of speech,  
90-91
eight  consciousnesses,  163-64,  i89n62  
Eighty-Four  Mahasiddhas  (Abhayadatta),  x 
empowerment  of the word,  14 
empowerments  
of Karpo  Sangmo,  13-14  
samaya  and, 103 
emptiness
vs. being  spaced  out, 129-30  
completion  stage  and, 15,184018  
crystal  ladder  metaphor  for, 31 
difficulties  with realizing,  24 
direct  experience  of, 21-22,26,27,74,  
131
display  of miracles  and, 184ml  
inferential  reasoning  and, 21-22,24,
67,119
inseparability  of wisdom  and, 57 
Mahamudra  view  of, 14-27  
mistakes  made  regarding,  136 
of nature  of mind,  26-27,71,78,121  
of  physical  body,  93 
Rangtong  vs. Shentong  on, 11,13,
78-79,185024  
sixteen  kinds  of, 79,187045  
space  as physical,  68 
sunlight  as metaphor  for mind ’s, 78-82  
unity  with luminous  clarity,  27,74,  
78-82,122,128,132-33,185024  
ether,  186040  
external  objects
difficulties  looking  direcdy  at, 28 
emptiness  as remedy  for fixation  on, 79, 
i87n45
looking  at mind  that experiences,  26 
transcending  fixation  on, 120 
See also appearances  
external  world,  as not cause  of  suffering,  
83-84  
extremes
being  free from,  107,108  
of existence  and nonexistence,  94 
ground  as beyond,  121-22  
view  beyond  all, 143

loo — INDEX
fire metaphor,  for Mahamudra,  109 
five actions  of  immediate  result,  109,188054  
five aggregates,  13
five buddha  families,  13,161-61, 184m;  
Foundation  Vehicle,  84 
awareness  in, 128 
on disturbing  emotions,  140 
realization  in, 23,112  
selflessness  of  persons in, 71 
Four  Dharma  Seals,  86,188049  
fourfold  fearlessness,  149, i8pn66 
fruition
conventional  view  of, 151 
of Mahamudra,  121,122,142,143,  
148-49
future,  not anticipating,  157
Gampopa,  122,125  
gandharvas,  14
Ganges  Mahamudra  (.Mahamudra  
Upadesha , Tilopa)  
benefits  of  practicing,  50,107-10,  
117-29
brief  description  of text,  xiii, xiv, 47-48,  
61-64
colophon,  53,150
commitments  of  Mahamudra,  49,101-5  
conduct  of Mahamudra,  49,89-91  
dedication  and aspiration,  53,150  
defects  of not practicing,  50, m-12  
different  editions  of, 62,67,150-51,  
186033,189067  
homage,  47,62  
importance  of, 57-61  
main  practice,  51-53,135-49  
manner  of  practicing,  50-51,115-29  
meditation  of Mahamudra,  49,92-96  
results  of  practice,  148-49  
root text, 47-53  
seven  major  topics  of, 67 
for those  of highest  faculties,  135-43  
for those  of  medium  or lesser  faculties,  
143-48
tide, 47,57,60,61
view  in six metaphors,  47-48, 67-84  
garuda,  5
gaze,  for steadying  the mind,  146 
Gendun  Choephel,  3 
generosity,  joining  with  Mahamudra,  109 
god realms,  41-43grasping
as source  of problem,  131 
transcending,  120 
See also conceptual  fixation  
Great  Kagyu  Masters,  The, xiii 
ground
getting  lost in  emptiness  of, 136 
of Mahamudra,  121-22  
path as recognition  of, 122 
of  purification,  80-81  
as unborn all-basis,  141 
view  as recognition  of, 67,92  
Guhyasamaja  tantra,  14 
guru
blessings  of, 117-18,119  
relying  on a, 115-11  
showing  the truth  of reality,  14,25,82  
guru  yoga,  87,120
hagiography,  3 
happiness
seeking  short-term,  116,119  
virtuous  actions  and, 41,77,108  
Heart  Sutra,  26,78  
hell realms,  41,126  
Hevajra  tantra,  6 
higher  realms  of  existence,  41-43  
highest  faculties,  practice  for those  of, 
i35-43
Hindu  culture.  Buddhism  and, ix 
Hoffman,  Helmut,  xii-xiii  
homage,  62 
hope  and fear
absence  of, as fruition,  142,143,151  
transcending,  121
human  existence,  characteristics  of, 75,93,  
187044
hungry  ghost realms,  116
ignorance,  i86n38  
dispelling  with luminous  clarity,  79 
intellect  as aspect  of, 62 
as marikpa,  128 
pacification  of, 128 
wisdom  nature  of, 161 
impermanence  and death,  93 
renunciation  and, 123,124  
inexpressibility,  of nature  of mind,  81-84  
inferential  reasoning  
common  view  and, 67, 71

INDEX  — 201
emptiness  and, 21-22,  24 
limitations  of, 69,91,129,156,138  
innate  coemergent  wisdom,  19 
being  introduced to, 23-24  
meaning  of, 24-25  
path  of recognizing,  24-27  
See also  wisdom
inner  heat (tummo ) practice,  147-48  
Insight  meditation.  See Vipashyana  
(Insight  meditation)
Instructions  of the Six Yogas  (Tilopa),  xiv 
intellect
as aspect  of ignorance,  62 
conventional  reality  and, 67-68  
letting  go of contrivances  of, 138 
study  of Dharma  and, 153 
See also conceptual  fixation  
interdependent  origination,  81, i87n47  
intermediate  state,  liberation  in, 58 
isolation, relying  upon,  124
Jamgon  Kongtrul  Lodro  Thaye,  151-52  
Jangden  Kukpa,  41 
jealousy,  wisdom  nature  of, 162 
jewel  family,  162
Kagyu  lineage,  xiii 
three  forefathers  of, 125 
Kalachakra  tantra,  56 
Kalu Rinpoche,  85 
karma  family,  162
Karmamudra  practice,  147-48,189064  
Karmapa,  Ninth,  Wangchuk  Dorje,  93, 
146
Karmapa,  Seventeenth,  xi 
Karmapa,  Sixteenth,  Rigpe  Dorje,  55 
Karmapa,  Third,  Rangjung  Dorje,  62,67,  
70-71,80,83,94  
karmic  imprints  
results  of  actions  and, 93,188055  
wrongdoing  and, 77,128  
Karpo  Sangmo,  13,14,15  
Kasuriva,  34 
Khenpo  Gangshar,  31 
Khenpo  Konchog  Gyaltsen,  xiii 
King  Indrabhuti,  125
knowledge  and wisdom  empowerment,  14
Lama  Norlha,  xi 
Lavapa,  15Leap  Over (togal)  practice,  56 
lesser  faculties,  practice  for those  of, 
143-48
Life  ofMahasiddha  Tilopa,  The (Marpa),  
xii
logical  reasoning.  See inferential  reasoning  
lotus  family,  162 
Luipa,  15 
Luje Denma,  42 
luminous  clarity  
of  buddha nature,  79-80,85  
calming  agitation  with,  74 
creation  stage  and, 5,15,184018  
devotion  and, 117 
difficulties  with recognizing,  80 
nature  of mind  and, 74,79-80,121,  
18308
sunlight  as metaphor  for minds,  78-82
third  turning  s emphasis  on, 23
as unimpeded,  85,153
unity  with  emptiness,  27,74,78-82,
122,128,131-33,185024  
as veil of awareness,  138
Machik  Lapdron,  90 
Madhyamaka.  See Middle  Way 
(Madhyamaka)  school  
Mahabrahma,  19,184021  
Mahamudra
attainment  of, 124,126,127-29  
benefit  of result  of, 27-28,148-49  
brief  overview  of, 55-57  
direct  experience  as path in, 21-22,  62 
even  placement  of, 97,139  
examples  of  different  styles  of  practice,  
124-25
as familiarization  with nature  of mind,  
92,96,122
far-reaching,  unfathomable  meaning  of, 
27-28
ground,  path,  and fruition  of, 121-22  
Jamgon  Kongtrul  on stages  of, 152 
no special  effort  in, 90,157-58  
practice  of  path  of, 24-27  
relying  on a guru in, 115-21  
Sarahas  teachings  on, xiii 
summary  of Tilopas  instruction in,  15 
Tibetan  translation  of  word  and 
meaning  of, 56-57  
Tilopas  six points  for, 157-59

2.02. — INDEX
Mahamudra  {continued)  
as torch  of the doctrine,  109-10  
unchanging  nature  of  teachings,  xiv-xv  
view  of, 10-14,67-84,  no, 141,143  
See also Ganges  Mahamudra  
Mahamudra  Lineage  Supplication,  The, 
no
Mahamudra  Subtle  Drop  tantra,  184019  
Mahamudra  Upadesha.  See Ganges  
Mahamudra  
mahasiddhas,  x-xi 
spiritual  biographies  of, 3-4,114-15,  
i89ns8
stories  about  powers  of, xi-xii  
three  stages  of actions  of, n 
Tilopa  as king  of, 58-60  
unsurpassable  attainments  of, 71-73  
from Urgyen, 30 
Mahayana  Vehicle  
awareness  in, 118 
on disturbing  emotions,  140 
emptiness  and, 11-n,  71 
realization  in, in 
two aspects  of, 84-85  
Maitreya,  111
mandala  offering  practice,  87 
mantra  recitation,  90 
marketplace  doha,  xiv 
on benefit  of result,  17-18  
on practice  of path, 14-17  
root text, 19-10  
on view  of Mahamudra,  10-14  
Marpa,  xi, xii, 11
on experiencing  nature  of mind,  81 
Ganges  Mahamudra  and, 55,150  
lifestyle  of, 4,115  
Naropa ’s transmission  to, 5,6,14,  
185030
Matangi,  xi, 14-16,184010  
meditation
beginner  experiences  in, 144
conduct  for, 89-91
formless,  i85ni9
importance  of practicing,  75,119
jeweled  bridge  metaphor  for, 31
of Mahamudra,  91-96,114,116
monarch  of  all, no, 141,143
with no object,  114,130
by not doing  anything,  157-58
physical  posture  for, 89-90,93,188050as process  of familiarization,  91,96,111,  
189057
recognizing  defects  of, 146-47  
relaxation  in, 86-87  
scrutinizing  the mind,  137,139  
in solitude,  114
techniques  for stabilizing,  145-47  
temporary  experiences  that  veil, 138 
two stages  of, 93
medium  faculties,  practice  for those  of, 
143-48
mental  (sixth)  consciousness,  74,164  
mental  dullness,  108,119-30  
mental  factors,  74
Middle  Way  (Madhyamaka)  school,  in, 
184ml
path  of  inference,  11-11  
Rangtongand  Shentong  schools,  zi, 13, 
77,185014  
Milarepa
hardships  and austerities  of, 64-65  
lifestyle  of, 115 
on nature  of thoughts,  75 
on power  of  Dharma,  11 
mind
conduct  of, during  meditation,  91 
conventional  vs. ultimate meaning  of, 
76-77
cutting  through  confused,  116-17  
as free of direction,  95-96  
as like the midst  of space,  94 
looking  direcdy  at mind, 70-73  
regarding  body  as more  important  than,  
91-93
scrutinizing,  137,139  
self-awareness  of, 131-33  
unceasing  manifestation  of, 85-86  
as wish-fulfilling  jewel,  69, 74,118,111  
See also nature  of mind  
mindfulness  
gaining  stability  in, 145 
importance  of, 61,75,104,110  
in postmeditation,  130 
as sharp  and  crisp,  95,146,153  
Mind-Only  school,  13,141  
Mipham  Rinpoche,  81 
miracles
display  of, 184ml  
of mahasiddhas,  xi-xii  
mirrorlike  wisdom,  161

INDEX 203
mist,  as example  of  way thoughts  dissolve,  
73-75
monastic  universities,  Buddhist  tradition  
of,x
Moonbeams  ofMakamudra  (Tashi  
Namgyal),  55-56,95,153  
mother  and child,  meeting  of, 144 
mundane  things  
abandoning,  124 
examining  nature  of, 122-23
Nagarjuna,  184ml,  185024  
brief  history  of, 124-25  
on emptiness,  79 
Tilopa  and, 7-9,14  
Nagatanga,  42 
Nagpogowa,  38 
Nagpopa,  15 
naked  awareness,  137-39  
Nalanda  Translation  Committee,  xiii 
Nalanda  University,  117 
Naropa
Ganges  Mahamudra  and, xiv, 55, 61,63,  
150
hardships  and austerities  of, 63, 64,150  
importance  of  guru  for, 117 
Tilopas  introducing  nature  of mind  
to, 24
as Tilopas  main  disciple,  xii, 34,35-36,  
185031
transmissions  to Marpa,  5,6,24,185030  
“nature, ” meaning  of, 185^6,186042  
nature  of mind
being  introduced  to, 23-24,25  
benefits  of recognizing, 27-28,83-84,  
126-29
blissful  nature  of, 77 
devotion  and, 63 
direct  experience  of, 131 
as distinct  from  thoughts and feelings,  
69-70,74,186041  
familiarization  with,  92,96,122  
as free from  extremes,  107,108  
as ground  of purification,  81 
inexpressibility  of, 82-84  
jeweled  bridge  metaphor  for resting  
in, 31
looking  directly  at, 26-27,28,70-73,91  
luminous  clarity  and, 74,79-80,121  
as naked  awareness,  137-39pacification  of  suffering  and, 77-78  
relaxation  when  looking  at, 86-87  
resting  in, 68-69,  95 
ultimate  reality  and, 76-77  
as unborn, 24,26,185025  
as unity  of emptiness  and luminous  
clarity,  78-82
words  used  for describing,  97-98  
negative  actions.  See wrongdoing  
nine formless  dakinis,  34,185030  
nirmanakaya,  4,59,18307  
nonconceptuality,  as veil of awareness,  138 
Nuden  Lodro (Marti), 37-38  
Nyi Od Dronma,  40 
Nyingma  tradition,  127,161
obscurations
buddha  nature  and, 24,25  
pacification  of, 109, no, 128,135,141,152  
oral instructions.  See pith instructions  
original  mind
as distinct  from  thoughts  and feelings,  
69-70,74
as luminous  clarity,  74 
See also nature  of mind
Padmasambhava,  30,31  
Paldarbum,  75 
past, not recalling,  157 
path
of liberation,  33,185029  
of Mahamudra,  121,122  
of ripening,  33,185029  
Patrul  Rinpoche,  138 
Pekar  Chojung  (Pema  Karpo),  xii 
Pema  Karpo,  xii, 184020  
phenomena
emptiness  as remedy  for fixation  on, 
78-79.187045  
emptiness  of, 21,23,27,128  
ground  as true nature  of, 67 
as indivisible in one essence,  25,26  
unchanging  nature  of, 81 
vast and unfathomable  emptiness  of, 
28,56
physical  body,  as empty  and without  
meaning,  91-93
physical  posture,  for meditation,  89-90,  
93,188050
pith instructions,  126,18306

zo4 INDEX
pith instructions  (continued)  
buddhahood  in one lifetime  and, 129 
Tilopa  and, 4,12-13, 14~IS» I7> ?i-34  
of  whispered  lineage, 30,32,185027  
Pointing  Out  the Dharmakaya  
(Wangchuk  Dorje),  93,146  
postmeditation
applying  instructions  during,  75 
conduct  for, 91,92  
mindfulness  in, 130 
working  with  thoughts  in, 97 
Prajnaparamita,  12,62,  m-12  
Prajnaparamita  teachings,  21,23,78  
preliminary  practices  
four  common,  93,109,1x9-20  
of meditation,  92-93  
ngondro,  87,109-10,120  
relying  on a guru,  115-21  
present,  not thinking  about,  157 
pride,  wisdom  nature  of, 162 
prophecy
instantaneous,  33-34  
path  of ripening  and, 33 
prostrations,  87, no 
pure realms,  sambhogakaya  and, 59-60
Rain  of Wisdom,  Ihe, 75 
Raja  Udmakemara,  15-16  
Rangtong  school,  21,23,77,78-79,  
185024
Ratnasambhava,  13,162  
Rechungpa,  22,185030  
relative  truth.  See conventional  reality  
relaxation
in meditation,  86-87,95  
in sitting  posture,  89-90,93  
renunciation,  116,119,123  
Rercpa,  34
Roberts,  Peter  Alan,  x 
Robinson,  James,  xiv
Samantabhadra,  127
samaya,  key of, 33. See also commitments  
(samaya)
sambhogakaya,  4,59-60,18307  
Sampopang  (“Proper  Container ”) 
sadhana,  71 
samsara
all-basis  and, 141
being  continually  carried  away  with,  112escaping  prison  of, 108-9,  lx7 
as nature  of suffering,  27,73,112,116,
126
problems  with,  93 
severing  all connections  with, 124 
stable  renunciation of,  116,119  
Tilopa ’s revulsion  with,  12 
Sangvadhupa,  14 
Sangye  Naga,  xii 
Saraha, xiii, 69,74,79,118,121  
seal, turning  emptiness into, 136 
secret  empowerment,  13-14  
self, emptiness  as remedy  for fixation  on, 
79
self-awareness,  of  mind,  132-33  
selflessness
of  persons,  71,96,112,128,188056  
of  phenomena,  96,112,188056  
self-liberation,  as final result,  143 
sensory  consciousnesses  (five),  163 
sesame  oil metaphor,  20,23-24  
seven  dharmas  ofVairochana,  89,93,  
i88nso
Shamatha  (Tranquillity  meditation),  93 
compared  with  Vipashyana,  95 
conceptual  fixation  and, 104 
luminous  clarity  and, 153 
stages  of, 144
techniques  for increasing,  145-47  
working  with thoughts  in, 74 
Shantideva,  62,84,95,132  
shastras  (commentaries),  importance  of, 58 
Shentong  school, 21,23,77,185024  
siddha  tradition,  in India,  x 
siddhis,  common  and uncommon,
148-49
Six Dharmas  (Yogas)  ofNaropa,  xiv, 4,5, 
6,147,18305
six perfections  (paramitas),  188053  
view  of Mahamudra  and, 102,109  
six realms  of  existence,  42-43,126,189059  
solitary  retreat,  124 
Somapuri,  xiv, 12 
space
blue  sky as ornamental,  76 
definition of, 76,186040  
space  metaphor
as absence  of  solidity, 68-70,77  
for nature  of mind,  98 
as not being  obscured,  76-78

INDEX 105
as practice  of Mahamudra,  70-75  
Rangjung  Dorje  on, 83 
speech
internal  conversations,  90 
during  meditation,  90-91  
spiritual  biographies  (namtar ) 
of mahasiddhas,  3-4,114-15,189058  
stories  of power  of siddhas  in, xi-xii  
as stories  of realization,  xii, 3 
symbolic  stories  in, 30-31  
Spiritual  Song  of Lodro  Thaye,  The, 151 
spiritual  songs.  See dohas  (spiritual  songs)  
subtle  channels  and energies,  13-14,  
i84ni7
inner  heat  practice  and, 148 
metaphor  for mastery  of, 31 
physical  posture  and, 90 
suchness
meaning  of, 15-16  
realization  of, 16,10  
suffering
emptiness of,  13,17  
internal  causes  of, 83-84  
as nature  of  samsara,  17,111,116,116  
negative  thoughts  and, 71 
pacification  of, 57,77-78,117  
preventing  mental  and physical,  73-74  
suffering  of  change,  116 
Sukhada,  30,31
sunlight  metaphor,  for mind ’s emptiness  
and luminosity,  78-81  
Sutra-pitaka,  107-8
Taranatha,  xi
temple  of  fragrance  {gandhalaya ), 31 
ten powers,  149,189065  
thoughts
as adventitious  stains,  81 
allowing  to settle,  139,140  
beginning  meditators and, 144 
as distinct  from  original  mind,  69-70,  
74,186041  
exhaustion of,  141 
liberation  from  bondage  of, 71 
looking  directly  at nature  of, 16,71-71,  
74-75.94-95. 96,113. 137 
Mahamudras  focus  on, 131 
mist as example  of  dissolution of, 73-75  
self-liberation  of, 95,104  
Three  Baskets,  107-8Three Cycles  of Doha  (Saraha),  xiii 
three  heart  spheres,  15,184019  
thukdam  (death  practice),  xii 
Tilopa
access  to pure realms,  60 
biographies  of, x-xi,  xii-xiii, 115 
childhood  of, 7-9 
delight  in Mahamudra,  135-36  
depictions  of, with fish, 1,36 
disciples  of, 34,35-41  
as emanation  of Chakrasamvara,  4-5, 
30,31,34,185018
enlightenment  of, xi, xiv, 4,5,16-17  
importance  of dohas  of, 58-61  
important  works  of, xiv 
marketplace  doha  of, 17,19-18  
ordination  of, 11 
physical  description  of, x 
receiving  secret  teachings,  19-34  
six points  for Mahamudra,  157-59  
teachers  of, 11-13,14-16,19  
as Tilopa  Sherab  Sangpo,  34 
two aspects  of biography  of, 19 
Vajradhara  and, 1,4,19,31,58-60  
See also Ganges  Mahamudra;  
marketplace  doha  
Tilopa  Cave,  37
torpor,  in meditation,  146-47,153  
Torricelli,  Fabrizio,  xii 
tranquillity,  devotion and, 117 
Tranquillity  meditation.  See Shamatha  
(Tranquillity  meditation)
Tsangpa  Heruka,  xii
ultimate  reality  
Mahamudra  view  of, 77,151  
nature  of mind and, 76-77  
Shantideva  on, 61 
ultimate  result,  149 
upadeshas  (practice  instructions),  
importance  of, 57-61  
Urgyen,  secret  teachings  from,  30-34  
Uttaratantra,  107
Vairochana,  13,161  
vajra  family,  161 
vajra  repetition  breathing,  146 
Vajradhara,  117
attaining  state  of, 58,118-19,  *35 
Tilopa  and, 1,4,19,31,58-60

zo  6 INDEX
Vajrasattva  practice,  87, no 
Vajrayana  
awareness  in, 118
buddhahood  in one lifetime  and, iz, 18, 
58, izs, 118-19,135  
direct  experience  in, 84 
on disturbing  emotions,  140 
mother  and father  tantras  of, 14-15  
Tilopas  introduction to,  11-13  
two paths  of, 33,185019  
view  in, 71,101  
Vajrayogini,  5, 6,30
vanquishing  negative  behavior  stage,  n, 
13,16,19
vase breathing,  146 
vase empowerment,  13 
Vasubandhu,  7 6
victorious  in all actions  stage,  n, 19 
view
common  vs. uncommon,  67-68  
of Mahamudra  as essential  for all 
practices,  101-z,  108-10  
monarch  of all, 110,141,143  
as recognition  of the ground,  67,91  
sutra approach  to, 71 
view,  metaphors  for, 67-84  
inexpressibility  of  mind ’s nature,  81-84  
mist as way  thoughts  dissolve,  73-75  
space  as absence  of  solidity,  68-70  
space  as not being  obscured,  76-78  
space  as practice  of Mahamudra,  70-73  
summary  of sue analogies,  83 
sunlight  as mind ’s emptiness and 
luminosity,  78-81  
Vinaya,  101Vinaya-pitaka,  107,108  
Vipashyana  (Insight  meditation),  93 
as not looking  for anything,  96 
resting  the mind  and, 95 
stages  of, 144
techniques  for increasing,  145-47  
virtuous  actions
in completely  virtuous  stage,  11,11,19  
happiness  and, 41,77,108,116  
limitations  of, 108,111  
Mahamudra  samaya  and, 103-4  
ten virtuous  deeds,  i88n54  
visualization
inner  heat practice  and, 148 
for steadying  the mind,  146-47
Waldo,  Ives,  xii 
Wangchuk  Gyaltsen,  xi, xii 
Way  of the Bodhisattva,  The (Shantideva),  
84,95,131
White  Annals,  The (Gendun  Choephel),  3 
wisdom
expanded,  of Mahamudra,  149 
inseparability  of emptiness and, 57 
that is awareness,  118 
twofold,  80,149  
wisdom of equality,  161 
wish-fulfilling  jewel,  69,74,118,111,  
i86n43  
wrongdoing
karmic  seeds  and, 77,118  
pacification  of, 109, no, 118 
ten unvirtuous  actions,  109, i88n54
Yonge  Mingyur  Dorje,  71

Biographical  Note
ABOUT  KHENCHEN  ThRANGU
In 1931,  the Seventh  Thrangu  Tulku  of  Thrangu  monastery  in Tibet  passed  
away,  and a few years  later,  the monastery  began  looking  for his reincarna ­
tion. They  visited the Sixteenth  Karmapa,  who  wrote  a letter  with  the fol­
lowing  information  about  his reincarnation:  his parents ’ names,  his name,  
and a description  of where  he lived.  The  party  then  went  to the Tai Situpa  
Rinpoche,  who,  without  seeing  the Karmapa  s letter,  wrote  another  predic ­
tion.  Both  letters  gave almost  exactly  the same  details.
Thrangu  Rinpoche  was born  in 1933,  and  when  he was  very  young,  he was 
discovered,  with the circumstances  being  just as the letters  had predicted,  
and at the age of five, he went  with  his parents  to Thrangu  Monastery  and 
stayed  there.  He then began  to study  and was considered  the monastery ’s 
best  pupil.  When  Rinpoche  was ten, he went  on a pilgrimage  to Lhasa  and 
visited  the Sixteenth  Karmapa,  Rigpe Dorje,  in Tsurpu.  He asked the Six­
teenth Karmapa  to become  his root  guru  and was told by the Karmapa  to 
practice  White  Tara  and go on a retreat.
When  Thrangu  Rinpoche  was fifteen  years old, Thrangu  Monastery,  
which  was under  the direction  of  Thrangu  Rinpoche  and Traleg  Rinpoche,  
established  a monastic  college  (shedra ). Thrangu  Rinpoche  and the stu­
dents  studied  under  Shechen  Gyaltsap,  who supported  the Shentong  view  
of Jamgon  Kongtrul  and  Mipham  Rinpoche.  When  Thrangu  Rinpoche  was 
twenty-one  years  old, he and Chogyam  Trungpa  Rinpoche  took  ordination  
under  the Sixteenth  Karmapa,  who  had  just returned  from  a trip to China.
In 1959,  the Chinese  started  to take  over  Tibet.  Thrangu  Rinpoche,  along  
with Khenpo  Karthar  and several  hundred other  Tibetans,  began  fleeing  
in front of the invading  army, undergoing  much  hardship.  Eventually,  
Thrangu  Rinpoche  ended  up in Baxa, India,  an encampment  of refugee

208 — BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE
Tibetan scholars  and practitioners,  studying  Dharma  under  teachers  from  
all four sects of Tibetan  Buddhism.  In a debate  in front  of 1,500 sangha  
members,  he passed  his oral examination  on all five divisions  of the great  
treatises.  The Dalai  Lama  conferred  upon  him the degree  of Geshe  Lha-  
rampa,  which  is a very  high  degree  in Tibetan  education.
At this time,  only  a few great  scholars  and rinpoches  had escaped  from  
Tibet,  many  Tibetan  religious  books  had been burned  or lost, and the 
Sixteenth  Karmapa  was trying  to reconstitute  in India the  second  largest  
Tibetan  Buddhist  lineage.  He asked  Thrangu  Rinpoche to set up another  
monastic  college  in Rumtek,  India,  which  he did with Khenpo  Tsiiltrim,  
by collecting  texts  from  libraries outside  of Tibet.  He taught  a first class  of 
Kagyu  and Nyingma  tulkus  and continued  to teach  young  tulkus  such as 
Ponlop  Rinpoche  and Dzigar  Kongtrul  Rinpoche  for several  more  years.
In 1976,  the Gyalwa  Karmapa  presented  Thrangu  Rinpoche  with  a certif ­
icate requesting  him to teach  in Dharma  centers  outside  India.  Since  then,  
Rinpoche  has tirelessly  taught  for over  forty  years  in centers  and monaster ­
ies in over  two  dozen  countries.  He has set up over  a dozen  centers,  including  
ones  in North  America,  Europe,  India,  Malaysia,  Hong  Kong,  and Taiwan.  
In addition,  he has published  forty  books  in English  on many  aspects  of 
Buddhism  and many  more  books  in Tibetan.
For more information  please  visit Thrangu  Rinpoche  s website  at www  
.rinpoche.com,  which  contains  a more  detailed  illustrated  biography  of  Rin­
poche  and a list of his centers  across  the world.

"As one of the greatest  living  teachers  of the Kagyu  lineage,  Yongzin  
Khcnchen  Thrangu  is eminently  qualified  to describe  the life of the ma- 
hasiddha  Tilopa,  who founded  that same  lineage.  Thrangu  Rinpoche ’s 
clear  exposition  of'Tilopa ’s magical  life and deeply  spiritual  poetry  will 
make  it possible  for more  people  to he inspired  by these  precious  stories  
and Mahamudra teachings. ”-THE  twelfth  tai situpa
Most traditions  of Mahamudra  meditation  can he traced  back  
to the mahasiddha  Tilopa  and his Ganges  Mahamudra , a "song 
of realization ” that he sang to his disciple  Naropa  on the banks  of the 
Ganges  River  more  than a thousand  years  ago. In this book,  Khenchen  
Thrangu,  a beloved  Mahamudra  teacher,  tells the extraordinary story  
ofTilopa ’s life and explains  its profound  lessons.  He follows  this story  
with a limpid  and practical  verse-by-verse  commentary  on the Gan ­
ges Mahamudra.  explaining  its precious  instructions  for realizing  Ma­
hamudra,  the nature  of one ’s mind.  Throughout.  Thrangu  Rinpoche  
speaks  plainly  and directly  to Westerners  eager  to receive  the essence  of 
Mahamudra  instructions from  an accomplished  teacher.
KHENCHEN  THRANGU  is an eminent teacher  of the Kagyu  tradition  
of Tibetan  Buddhism.  He was appointed  by the Dalai  Lama  to be the 
personal  tutor for His Holiness  the Seventeenth  Karmapa  and has au­
thored  many  books,  including  The Mahamudra  Lineage  Prayer.  Lumi ­
nous  Clarity , Advice  from  a Yogi.  Pointing  Out the Dharmakaya,  Everyday  
Consciousness  and Primordial  Awareness,  and Vivid  Awareness.
Cover  arl by Robert  Beer | 2019  Shambhala  Publications.  Inc.
Printed  in U.S.A.
W  W W. SI 1A M BIIA LA.COM
ISBN e17fl-l-55 c13c1-Mfl7-l
51995
MBI 10 7 PM ^ ^ 0 70/.R71 1A
SNOW  LION7 (0 1 jj 7 J74  0r l 
US $19.95 CAN  $25.95

