Ocean  oe D h a r m a  S eries
IT-LT-IT-LT-LT-IT-LT-LT^
T pe Twelve Links
°f
Interdependent Origination
L T -L T -L T -^ -L T -L T -L T -L tJ -T ^ ^
Kh e n c h e n  T h r a n g u  R in p o c h e


Long L ife Prayer 
for
His Holiness 17th Gyalwang Karmapa 
Urgyen Trinley Dorje
Naturally arising Dharmakaya,unchanging and ever-present,  
Karmapa, You appear as the Form Kaya’ s magical illusion.  
May Your Three Secret Vajras remain stable in the realms  
And Your Infinite Spontaneous Activity blaze in glory.
written by 
His Eminence Gyaltsab Rinpoche


OCEAN of DHARMA
Series
comprise oral teachings given by Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche. They 
cover many of the main themes of the Buddhas teachings, presented 
in a style easily accessible for Western students.
They are reproduced through 
the inspiration of H.H. Karmapa, 
the blessing of Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche, 
the guidance of Ven. Lama Karma Shedrup, 
and the permission of Namo Buddha Publications.
This Series is dedicated, 
to their long life and prosperity.
Zhyi-sil Cho-kyi Gha-tsal
Publications


OCEAN OF DHARMA SERIES
The Twelve Links 
Interdependent Origination
Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche

Copyright © 2001 by Namo Buddha 
& Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal Publications.
ISBN number: 1-877294-13-6
Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal Publications 
PO Box 6239, Wellesley St,
Auckland, New Zealand 
email: inquiries@greatliberation.org 
www.greatliberation.org
All rights reserved. No part of this book, either text or art, may be 
reproduced in any form, electronic or otherwise, without written permission 
fromThrangu Rinpoche or Namo Buddha Publications.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Ken Holmes for translating this teaching and Gaby 
Hollmann for transcribing and Terry Lukas for editing the text.
Note
We have italicized each technical word the first time that it is used to alert 
the reader that it may be found in the Glossary of Terms.

Contents
Biography ofThrangu Rinpoche  9
Foreword  1 1
1 :  Cause & Effect 13
2: The Twelve Links 17
1  Ignorance  17
2 Karmic Creation  22
3 Consciousness  24
4 Name & Form  25
5 7 7 ? < ?  Perceptual Entrances  27
6 Contact  28
7 Feeling  28
8 Grasping  29
9 Adoption  30
10 Becoming  30
11 Rebirth  31
12 Aging & Death  31
7 7 ?^  Process o f Interdependent Origination  32

Contents
3: The Two Main Kinds of Causes 33
The Accompanying Conditions  36
The View  36
The Five Aspects o f Causality  37
The Eight Examples  39
4: The Relevance of Interdependence for
The Buddhist Teachings 41
Interdependence in the Sutras  44
Interdependence in the Mahamudra  45
5: The Twelve Links Applied to Ones Action 47
The Three Groups o f the Twelve Links  48
The Conventional & Ultimate Aspect  49
The Twelve Links & Their Analogies  50
The Six Realms ofSamsara  51
Notes  53
Glossary o f Terms  55
Meditation Centre Information  60
Long Life Prayer for Thrangu Rinpoche  62
8

Biography ofThrangu Rinpoche
The lineage of the Thrangu Rinpoche incarnations began in the 
fifteenth century when the Seventh Karmapa, Chodrak Gyatso visited 
the region ofThrangu in Tibet. At this time, His Holiness Karmapa 
established Thrangu Monastery and enthroned Sherap Gyaltsen as the 
first Thrangu Rinpoche, recognizing him as the re-established 
emanation of Shuwu Palgyi Senge, one of the twenty-five great siddha 
disciples of Guru Padmasambhava.
Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche is the ninth incarnation of this lineage 
and was born in Kham, Tibet in 1933. When he was four, H.H. The 
Sixteenth Gyalwa Karmapa and Palpung Situ Rinpoche recognized him 
as the incarnation ofThrangu Tulku by prophesying the names of his 
parents and the place of his birth.
Entering Thrangu monastery, from the ages of seven to sixteen he 
studied reading, writing, grammar, poetry, and astrology, memorised 
ritual texts, and completed two preliminary retreats. At sixteen under 
the direction of Khenpo Lodro Rabsel, he began the study of the three 
vehicles of Buddhism while staying in retreat.
At twenty-three he received full ordination from the Karmapa. 
When he was twenty-seven, Rinpoche left Tibet for India at the time 
of the Communist invasion. He was called to Rumtek, Sikkim, where 
the Karmapa had his seat in exile. At thirty-five, he took the geshe 
examination before 1500 monks at Buxador monastic refugee camp 
in Bengal, and was awarded the degree of Geshe Lharampa. On his
9

The Twelve Links of Interdependent Origination
return to Rumtek he was named Abbot of Rumtek monastery and the 
Nalanda Institute for Higher Buddhist studies at Rumtek. He has 
been the personal teacher of the four principal Karma Kagyu tulkus: 
Shamar Rinpoche, Situ Rinpoche, Jamgon Kongtrul Rinpoche and 
Gyaltsab Rinpoche.
Thrangu Rinpoche has travelled extensively throughout Europe, 
the Far East and the USA. He is the abbot of Gampo Abbey, Nova 
Scotia, and of Thrangu House, Oxford, in the UK. In 1984 he spent 
several months in Tibet where he ordained over 100 monks and nuns 
and visited several monasteries. He has also founded Thrangu Tashi 
Choling monastery in Boudhnath; a retreat centre and college at Namo 
Buddha east of the Kathmandu Valley, and has established a school in 
Boudhnath for the general education of lay children and young monks. 
He also built Tara Abbey in Kathmandu. In October of 1999 he 
consecrated the college at Sarnath which will accept students from the 
different traditions of Buddhism and will be open to Western students 
as well.
Thrangu Rinpoche has given teachings in over 25 countries and is 
especially known for taking complex teachings and making them 
accessible to western students. Thrangu Rinpoche is a recognised master 
of Mahamudra meditation.
More recently, because of his vast knowledge of the Dharma, he 
was appointed by His Holiness the Dalai Lama to be the personal tutor 
for the recently escaped Seventeenth Karmapa.
10

Ven. Lama Karma Shedrup Chogyi Senge Kartung
Foreword
I am very pleased that the pure and profound dharma teachings of 
Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche are now being reproduced here in 
English for the many students in the Southern Hemisphere, fulfilling 
a long held wish of mine.
Thrangu Rinpoche is one of the most important living masters of 
the Karma Kagyu Lineage of Buddhism. Through his vast wisdom 
and immeasurable love and compassion he has turned the wheel of 
dharma in all directions.
Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche is a highly realised master of the 
Mahamudra lineage who has also attained mastery of the many 
scriptures and general sciences. Thus to receive teachings from him 
with his easily accessible and skilful presentation is very fortunate.
Therefore I would like to express my sincere appreciation to Rinpoche 
for bestowing this blessing on us and to Clark Johnson of Namo 
Buddha Publications for permission and assistance in reproducing 
these teachings.
1 1

The Twelve Links of Interdependent Origination
To dharma practitioners I pray that through receiving these 
teachings, what arises is correct understanding, fruitful practice 
and fulfilment of all the Buddhadharmas. Please treasure and respect 
this book as a direct teaching of the Buddha, which liberates limitless 
beings.
May this merit cause the life and teachings of the great masters to 
flourish and remain for many aeons benefiting limitless sentient 
beings.
Written on the 22nd o f April 2000.
Karma Choeling Buddhist Monastery 
66 Bodhisattva Road 
RD 1  Kaukapakapa 
New Zealand
12

1
Cause & Effect
The teachings on Mahamudra}  are mainly concerned with discovering 
the essence of mind, which is emptiness (Skt. shunyatd)1  or “the way 
things really are”  (Tib. nge lug)  on the ultimate level.3  The teachings on 
interdependent origination (Tib. tendrel)  are complementary to the 
M aham udra teachings because they deal with “the way things 
appear”(Tib. khri lug).  Although on the ultimate level things are really 
emptiness or the undifferentiated pure nature, on the conventional or 
relative level things manifest because of each other; they depend upon 
each other, they originate one from another. The teachings on the twelve 
links concern interdependence and the way things originate in 
dependence on each other.
These teachings on what is therefore called “interdependent 
origination”  deal with the world as we experience it. Even though we 
understand through the Mahamudra teachings that everything ultimately 
has a pure nature, our everyday experience of the inner self and the 
outer world of phenomena is experienced as a relative universe, as a 
process of dependent origination. The twelve links examine the way 
things appear in this world.
Where does the world of relative manifestations we experience— 
whether the outer world of the four elements (earth, water, fire, and air) 
or the inner world of our body, speech, and mind— come from? Various
13

The Twelve Links of Interdependent Origination
religions and philosophies have proposed answers to explain the 
manifestation of the relative world. Some philosophies that existed in 
India at the time of the Buddha, for instance, postulated no cause for 
things to happen. If this were the case, then absolutely anything could 
happen at any time in a haphazard way, without needing any cause; 
sometimes things would take place, sometimes they would not. 
Absolutely anything could be possible in any moment. Now we know 
that this is not true. If we observe phenomena and the way they appear, 
then we see very clearly that they can only happen when causes are 
present and combined in such a way that allows them to appear. There 
is not an infinite possibility of anything happening. Having an effect 
without a cause is not true.
Other philosophical schools think that some divine power, a god or 
gods, could be the possible cause for the creation of the things that we 
experience. They think, for instance, that a god might create not only 
the outer world but also be responsible for our own inner happiness, 
our suffering, and how we relate to the world. O f course, when one 
believes that there is a god or a creator, then it is necessary to pray to the 
god and make offerings to show respect to that god. The people who 
believe this way feel that their happiness comes from respecting and 
paying homage to the god and that if they do not carry out these actions, 
suffering and punishment will ensue. That is another way to explain 
cause and effect in our relative world.
In fact, the views that we hold in our minds are the true causes for 
the manifestation of the things we experience. To counteract the incorrect 
views that were present during the Buddhas time, the Buddha taught 
interdependence as the way things manifest. Furthermore, he broke this 
process into twelve stages. He explained that the things we experience 
do not result from no cause, nor do they come from a god or gods.
In fact, the Buddhist belief is that each thing manifests because of 
its own specific cause. For instance, if we feel happy, then there is a 
specific reason that we are happy. If we are suffering, then there is a 
specific reason or reasons for that suffering. Each condition has its prime 
cause, its main cause.
14

Cause & Effect
There is not only a primary cause for an effect to occur, but there 
are also many secondary conditions and circumstances which, if present, 
will modify the quality of the way something manifests. In brief, 
everything has its causes and conditions, and these causes and conditions 
interact with each other to make up our experience. What we experience 
as the outer world, as well as our inner mind, is all due to the 
interdependent play of causes and conditions. In his kindness, the 
Buddha gave the extraordinary and special teachings on interdependence 
to explain how things are produced. Interdependence explains causation 
in terms of the material world. For example, a flower must have a prime 
cause, which is a seed. The seed makes a shoot, and the shoot grows 
into a flower. For the flower to grow, the flower must have the primary 
cause or seed, but it must also have the secondary causal conditions of 
soil, warmth, sunlight, water, and so forth. Also, as far as mind is 
concerned, the complexity which is our mind and our being is made up 
of the Five aggregates  (Skt. Skandhas ), which also emerge because of causes 
and conditions and their interplay. This is explained in particular through 
the twelve links. We come to understand that through ignorance 
something emerges, which eventually makes the five skandhas, life, that 
is our own experience.
The Buddhas teachings explain outer and inner interdependence. 
We have seen the outer form in the example of the flower. The inner 
form has more to do with our own being. O f these two, it is the 
understanding of inner interdependence that is most important for 
us. By understanding how interdependence works in our mind, we see 
in sequence how one thing produces another through the twelve links 
of causation. It is made clear to us that once there is “this”  particular 
thing, then “that”  will happen, or, in other words, “this”  cause is the 
ground giving rise to “that”  effect. In this way, we understand how 
inner interdependence takes place progressively, how the interaction 
of complex elements makes up our inner experience. When we study 
this, we do so in the actual process of creation and action that generates 
samsara.  We also study the order in which we can take this process 
apart. Dismantling the process of samsara shows the way to liberation
15

The Twelve Links o/Interdependent Origination
and enlightenment. This is the reason why the teachings on inner 
interdependence are very important.
16

2
The Twelve Links
1. Ignorance
In the presentation of the twelve links of interdependence, the first link, 
which is the basis for all the others, is ignorance. Being ignorant creates 
all the ups and downs, the happiness and the suffering, that are part 
and parcel of samsaric experience. Samsara is like that: sometimes we 
are happy and sometimes we suffer. All of the complex illusions and 
manifestations which are this samsaric world are rooted in ignorance. 
Here, ignorance means “not knowing”  the true nature of existence. When 
one does not understand or recognize the true nature of reality, then 
through this “ignoring,”  all the manifestations of samsara come about. 
Ignorance is therefore the prime cause of our happiness and our suffering. 
That is why it is presented as the first of the twelve links.
The first, root link of ignorance means that, by ignoring the 
true nature of phenomena, we project things which do not exist; we 
are deluded, we are confused. Although there is no self, we are under 
the illusion of having a “self.”  Although everything is impermanent, 
we incorrectly project permanence onto everything. We also believe 
that some things such as material possessions will bring lasting 
happiness, when in fact they do not. Our ignorance gives rise to 
confusion. And because of confusion, our samsaric world is generated;
17

The Twelve Links of Interdependent Origination
all the ways we have of relating to things are generated from the root 
cause of ignorance.
In a way, this is good news, because it means that samsara and its 
suffering are easy to get rid of If samsara and suffering were real and 
solid and not just due to the confusion of our own mind, then they 
would be very hard, almost impossible to get rid of. As it is, because the 
root cause of suffering and samsara is the confusion and ignorance of 
our mind, if we remove that delusion and ignorance, then the very root 
of samsara and suffering can be eliminated. By working on our mind s  
confusion we can become liberated. Clearly, this is very fortunate. We 
have the possibility of liberation and enlightenment by attacking the 
very root of samsara and its complex suffering.
There is a famous example in the Buddhist scriptures, illustrating 
how ignorance is the root of our suffering and showing how if we 
eliminate this mistaken view, the misery of samsara will go away. It is 
the example of mistaking a rope for a snake. If one goes into a dark 
room and sees a coiled rope, one might believe out of ignorance that the 
rope is a snake. Thinking that the rope is a snake, one would be full of 
fear and other painful and disturbing emotions. If there really were a 
snake, then one would be in serious trouble and would have to work 
hard to get out of the situation. But in this case, there is only confusion: 
there is no snake, only a rope. By examining what is really there, one 
realizes that it is not a snake at all, and ones feelings of panic and 
anxiety are eliminated. Similarly, if samsara, which is quite frightening 
with all its pain and suffering, were as real as it seems, then to be free of 
it would be quite a job. But because samsaras very root is our own 
ignorance and confusion, then once we get rid of these, all of the problems 
of samsara will disappear. It is not that samsara is real and we have to 
get rid of it, but that our perception of samsara is rooted in a basic 
mistake; it is the mistake that needs to be eliminated. Once that is 
done, we will be liberated from all of samsara.
In order to counteract the confusion and ignorance which are the 
root of suffering, the Buddha taught at three different levels, which are 
called the three vehicles ' .  His teachings of the first vehicle, the Hinayana,
18

The Twelve Links
are easiest to understand. In the Hinayana, the Buddha explained that 
our suffering in samsara is due to our mistaken belief that we are a 
solid, real self. He showed that, in reality, there is no lasting self, and 
that it is through our fabrication of the notion of self that all our suffering 
and difficulties come about. Through discovering that there is no lasting 
self, one realizes that there is no one who suffers, no one who has 
difficulties— this is indeed liberation. The way to establish that there is 
no lasting self is to try to find the “self,” by carefully analyzing the 
components of one’ s existence, specifically the five aggregates ,  the twelve 
dhatus,  and the eighteen elements.  One tries to find a single individual 
self, the thing we refer to as “I,”  and instead one finds only a collection 
of aggregates or elements. One then looks at mind through the passage 
of time and finds that the “I”  that was in the past is not the “I”  that is 
in the present, nor is it the “I”  that will be in the future. Through such 
careful analysis, one understands clearly that there is no lasting self. 
Through meditating profoundly on the meaning of that, the confusion 
and the delusion caused by the projection of a lasting self are overcome. 
This is how the prime source of suffering and difficulties is removed 
according to the teachings of the first vehicle, called the Hinayana.
To those with great intelligence and with a broader vision and 
wisdom, the Buddha taught a combination of skilful means and wisdom 
in the second vehicle, the Mahayana .  In order to remove ignorance, the 
Buddha demonstrated that not only was the individual self “empty”  or 
devoid of a lasting self, but that all outer phenomena, such as mountains 
and trees, as well as inner thoughts and feelings, were also empty. By a 
skillful and profound analysis of gross phenomena, especially as presented 
in the madhyamika  or “middle way teachings,”  one comes to understand 
that there is no phenomenon that has true existence, because all gross 
things are merely collections of smaller components and do not have an 
existence in their own right. Phenomena are just concoctions of smaller 
things. By working down to the most subtle objects, to the notion of an 
atom or tiniest building-block of matter, one recognizes that there are 
no lasting self entities in the phenomenal world.
19

The Twelve Links of Interdependent Origination
Likewise, one applies a similar logic to one s own mind. One analyzes 
mind in terms of time, going to the tiniest fraction of mind-moments. 
From this analysis, one realizes that mind and thoughts and feelings 
also do not have the lasting entity that they seem to have. Through all 
these skilful approaches, one understands emptiness in a broader sense: 
the fact that all phenomena are devoid of inherent existence.5  Through 
these logical analyses, one develops the view of emptiness; then one 
contemplates and meditates on that truth. This overcomes all illusions. 
The value of this approach is that it not only brings liberation for oneself, 
but that through the whole context in which it is presented it brings 
liberation for many, many beings.
Although the Hinayana is a wonderful approach and benefits many 
beings, it is said in the scriptures that the time it might take to go through 
the process of the Hinayana and Mahayana could be as long as three 
countless eons, which is in the order of millions of years.
The third vehicle is the Vajrayana,  which gives us the opportunity 
to reach buddhahood very quickly. The Vajrayana recognizes that, while 
it is important to analyze external phenomena, this process takes a long 
time; the Vajrayana approach is to examine the mind, which is very 
close and far easier to analyze.
On the gross level, we see our mind as a single thing, as something 
that exists and that experiences thoughts and feelings and perceptions. 
This is a very powerful experience, and we feel sure that the mind exists 
as a solid entity. But once we examine mind closely to discover its 
character, its very nature or essence, we find that mind is devoid of any 
entity at all. We cannot find any color or any shape for it, nor can we 
find any place where mind rests. In fact, this thing we call “mind”  is no 
thing whatsoever and is found nowhere. Mind is empty by its very 
essence. After the emptiness of mind is established, the Vajrayana 
approach is to look at the emptiness of outer phenomena— whose 
emptiness will then be easier to establish, because outer phenomena are 
only appearances of the mind, which has already been established as 
being empty.
20

The Twelve Links
The Buddhas teachings are generally presented in terms of the sutras  
and ta n tra s .  We find the inform ation on the twelve links of 
interdependence mainly in the sutras; however, the teachings on 
interdependence are equally valid for the tantras.
As already presented, there are twelve links of interdependence, which 
begin with the first link, ignorance. This is the ignorance of not 
understanding the true nature of reality, which is emptiness. It is this 
ignorance that causes us to wander in samsara. It is through the ignorance 
of not knowing the truth that the other steps follow, the reason our 
minds become samsaric. Ignorance, again, means not knowing the true 
nature of reality; only seeing how reality seems to be and not what it 
really is.
Among the Vajrayana teachings are the Mahamudra teachings. The 
point of the Mahamudra teachings is to gain a true vision of the nature 
of reality. In Mahamudra practice, we learn to develop first shamatha  
and then vipashyana.  Through vipashyana, we eventually come to 
recognize the true nature of reality. By doing so, we are attacking the 
very root of the twelve links, which is ignorance. Instead of not knowing, 
we have clear knowing of the true nature of reality. We can thus see that 
there is no conflict at all between the sutra path and the tantra path, 
and that the teachings on the twelve links are very helpful for our practice 
of the Vajrayana.
Because of the first link, one ends up in samsara, where the whole 
samsaric process goes on. Ignorance is the prime cause and root which 
accompanies the samsaric mind. Some texts speak of “raw ignorance”  
and “accompanying ignorance,”  which means that ignorance goes along 
with our thoughts and experiences. Thus there is both the basic ignorance 
of not knowing the true nature of things and accompanying ignorance.
Basic ignorance, or “ignoring the true nature,”  is expressed in the 
sutras as “not recognizing the dharmata,”  with dharmata  being the very 
essence of phenomena. Basic ignorance is expressed in Mahamudra 
slightly differently, as “not recognizing the essence of mind.”  Either 
way, it is the root ignorance, while accompanying ignorance goes along 
with our thoughts and feelings. When there is a very gross and coarse
21

The Twelve Links o/Interdependent Origination
level of thinking, such as, for example, the desire for things that seem so 
powerfully attractive to the mind, instead of recognizing what is 
happening and recognizing the truth that such things are empty of 
inherent nature, one thinks that the things one desires are really very 
important and worth getting. One is both ignorant of the true nature 
(basic ignorance) and deluded by the apparent nature (accompanying 
ignorance). The same is true of anger. What seems unpleasant is rejected 
with aversion; not recognizing the empty nature of appearances, there is 
accompanying ignorance as well. Sometimes there is neither the power 
of attraction nor rejection, but just a mental dullness. Again, not 
recognizing the true nature is accompanied by delusion. These are the 
three main mind poisons: desire, aversion and mental dullness, all 
accompanied by ignorance.
Because ignorance accompanies thoughts and feelings, one acts and 
does things, creating the next link in the chain of interdependent 
origination, which is karmic creation.
2. Karmic Creation
The three root poisons of mind— desire, aggression, and stupidity— are 
rooted in ignorance and cause us to act. The strength of these passions or 
disturbing emotions (Skt. kleshd)  is sometimes very strong, overwhelming, 
and sometimes very weak, having only a slight influence on the mind. 
The power of these emotions determines our actions, which result in 
karma. For instance, sometimes we feel a very powerful sense of love and 
compassion towards others and develop virtuous karma. With these 
feelings, we perform actions that are loving and compassionate, the result 
being positive or virtuous action. Sometimes the disturbing emotions 
become very strong, and we then do unvirtuous actions such as lying, 
stealing, and harming others. Whether we do virtuous or unvirtuous 
actions determines whether we will experience pleasure or pain in the 
future. Unvirtuous actions lead to more samsaric suffering.
22

The Twelve Links
Karma literally means “action.”  There are three kinds of karma— 
positive, negative, and neutral karma. Positive karma are the results of 
actions which lead to pleasant results, negative karma are actions which 
lead to unpleasant results and neutral karma is neither positive nor 
negative. Meditation, the practice of making the mind concentrate 
one-pointedly, is an action that creates neutral karma. However, 
meditation can produce positive results so that if one meditates 
thoroughly and long enough, one can actually produce the results of 
being reborn not in the human realm  but in the form  realm  of the gods 
or even the formless realm.  So there are three kinds of karma— virtuous, 
unvirtuous, and neutral.
Due to ignorance the mind has the disturbing emotions of passion 
or desire, anger or aggression, and stupidity; because of these, we 
perform unvirtuous actions. These actions have later consequences 
and create what is called “bringing together circumstances”  or “karmic 
creation.”  The resulting effect of our actions is the second link of 
interdependent origination. For example, if one has harmed another 
being by killing, in the future ones own life-force will be damaged; 
one might be killed or one might be very sick. As a result of our 
actions, we experience something.
The second aspect of karma is called “cause for developing a 
tendency,”  in which an action has a conditioning effect so that the action 
becomes easier to do the next time. For example, if we perform an 
unvirtuous action such as killing someone, not only do we receive the 
negative karma from this action, but we also build up the habit for 
harming life, making it easier to kill again. Whatever action we do— 
whether positive or negative— we develop a habit and become used to 
it, making it easier to do in the future. These types of actions possesses 
a cause that will produce two types of results: future experience and 
conditioning or habit. This is the second, karmic link, which is created 
through our actions.
23

The Twelve Links o/Interdependent Origination
3. Consciousness
The third link is consciousness, meaning that (a) because of the first 
link of ignorance, (b) we perform an action, which is the second link, 
and (c) this action plants a seed in our mind or, we could say, imprints 
and conditions our consciousness. At some time later, through the 
conditioning, through the seed that has been planted, a certain 
experience will occur in the future, a certain habitual tendency will be 
there in the future, because of what we have done before. There is 
both a potential for experience and a potential for being and acting in 
a certain way. These seeds or imprints are sown in our stream of 
consciousness. Our conditioned consciousness is thus the third link 
in the chain of interdependent origination, with “conditioned”  referring 
to imprinted links.
We know that some beings are born into fortunate circumstances 
and have a positive mind, while others are born into unfortunate 
circumstances and have a very negative mind. Some people are nice, 
others are not; some are good, others are not; some experience much 
suffering, others seem to have it very easy. All of this is because of the 
way consciousness has been conditioned by ones actions in the past. 
The way the consciousness has been conditioned is what will determine 
the quality of one s life experience as time goes by. This is what happens 
overall in consciousness.
More specifically, there are two kinds of conditioned consciousness. 
One is called “the causal consciousness,”  the other is called “the 
resultant consciousness.”  The causal consciousness has to do with what 
happens at the time when we are acting. When we are acting, we are 
imprinting a result in our stream of consciousness. That impregnation, 
or one could say that conditioning or sowing of the seed, stays with us 
until the time the result manifests. It stays dormant in our stream of 
consciousness until conditions are ripe for the result to manifest. It 
establishes an imprint.
Some time later that imprint will manifest and produce a result. At 
that time we come to the resultant consciousness. Depending upon
24

The Twelve Links
whatever action one has done, then one gets the result— pleasant or 
unpleasant, good or bad.
O ne of the main contexts in which the twelve links of 
interdependence are presented deals with rebirth and how the links affect 
us from one lifetime to the next lifetime, how the actions that we do in 
this lifetime will produce effects in future lifetimes. What is happening 
to us in this lifetime is the result of what we did in a previous lifetime. 
Those aspects of consciousness that establish karma, literally called 
“gathering karma,”  are the casting consciousness and, some time later, 
the result that emerges. This takes place on many levels. It means that 
as we act, from day to day, we are continuously imprinting and 
conditioning our stream of consciousness. How we act this year influences 
how we will be next year. How we act in this life influences how we will 
be in the next life. In terms of creating rebirth, the two together make 
what is called “the rebirth-establishing consciousness.”
The actions of our body, speech, and mind make imprints. But the 
imprints themselves are all in the mind, in the stream of consciousness. 
W hether we are acting physically, verbally or mentally, we are 
conditioning the mind. The mind never stops continuing, like a stream. 
But the body and speech are interrupted and do not go on forever. The 
physical karma that we engage in makes a certain set of imprints in our 
ongoing consciousness and these imprints eventually become the body 
we have in our next life. Each verbal action we perform makes imprints 
and each conditions our stream of consciousness. This eventually 
determines the quality of our speech in a future life. So we can see that 
this ongoing stream of consciousness, which is continually being 
conditioned, is now becoming a cause for the fourth link.
4. Name & Form
The title “name and form”  is another word for the five mental aggregates 
(Skt. skandhd).  Name refers to the last four aggregates: feelings, cognition, 
mental events and consciousness. Form refers to the first aggregate. What 
does this mean? This means that after we have died and have been
25

The Twelve Links o/Interdependent Origination
reincarnated in a new life, we are conceived and at first do not yet have 
a complete body with all the feelings and mental activities which very 
much depend upon the way our body is made up. Form is literally the 
embryo, the potential for the aggregates. All the genetic potential for 
the form that is to come is the conditioned potential for the various 
feelings, conditions, cognitions and consciousnesses that will emerge, 
once the body is formed. They are present but only nominally, and for 
this reason they are called “name.”  One cannot have the eye-consciousness 
until there are eyes to see, and so forth.
In the time of the Buddha, the Buddha asked that temples display 
a drawing of the six realms of existence. In Tibet this has been formalized 
in the “Wheel of Life”  paintings. These paintings all have a rooster, 
snake and pig in the center, representing the three root emotions of 
passion, aggression, and ignorance. Next is a circle with six divisions, 
representing the six realms o f samsara.  Finally, along the outside is a 
circle depicting the twelve links that lead to samsara.
The first link, ignorance, is depicted by the image of a blind person. 
A blind person cannot see and consequently does not know which way to 
go. Through ignorance, one is not aware of the true nature of reality and 
because of this, one wanders in samsara, not knowing which way to go.
The second link of karmic creations is symbolized by a potter making 
a pot. At first there is a raw lump of clay that goes on the wheel. The 
potter shapes it with his hands, and gradually it emerges into the form 
it will have. Similarly, through our karmic creations— sometimes positive, 
sometimes negative— we are gradually establishing the pattern of our 
future. Through our actions, we are shaping how our body, speech, and 
mind will be in the future.
The third link, consciousness, is very com plicated in its 
conditioning and the way it works. We saw that the casting and 
resulting consciousness can be quite complicated. Consciousness can 
be positive or negative and contains the whole power of the result 
which will eventually emerge. Because it is so varied, so complicated, 
it is depicted by a monkey. Monkeys are continually busy: they swing
26

The Twelve Links
around in trees and play, getting into lots of things. This is why 
consciousness is depicted by a monkey.
The fourth link, name and form, has to do with the future rebirth 
one will take. It is carried over from one life into the next and therefore 
is depicted by a boat that carries one across the water from one land 
to another.
In our study of the twelve links we got as far as the fourth link, 
which refers to the five aggregates when they are just beginning to form 
in the womb of the mother. That is why this link is called “name and 
form,”  because many of the aggregates are still merely nominal. Their 
potential is there, but they are not yet active. The links are presented in 
terms of how what happens in one lifetime determines what the next 
life will be. In that context, the preceding links establish the five 
aggregates of name and form in the next life.
At first in the womb, there is merely form; the other aggregates are 
not very active. Step by step and bit by bit, the basis for the aggregates 
to exist develops and leads to the fifth link.
5. The Perceptual Entrances
The fifth link is the six perceptual entrances  (Skt. ayatana)  which are: the 
visual faculty, the hearing faculty, the smelling faculty, the tasting faculty, 
the physical sensation faculty, and the mental faculty. When the eye 
organ develops, it will eventually become the basis for visual 
consciousness; as the ear develops, it gives us the basis for auditory 
consciousness, and so on. The ayatanas enable consciousness to arise 
and to develop within a certain field. For instance, once the visual faculty 
is working, it enables the visual consciousness to make contact with the 
things it sees, to explore them, and to develop into them. The Tibetan 
term for these perceptual entrances literally means to “arise and develop.”
The eyes, ears, nose, tongue, and body perception (of touch) 
develop, as does the brain, in the womb. Because these organs will 
eventually allow our perception of the world to enter, they are called 
the “doors of perceptions”  or “perceptual entrances.”  Perception itself,
27

The Twelve Links of Interdependent Origination
however, does not occur at this fifth step and must wait for the sixth 
link, contact. The fifth link is depicted in the “Wheel of Life”  as a 
building with many windows.
6. Contact
The word “contact”  has a very precise meaning here. It means the contact 
of the faculty— the five sense faculties and the mind faculty— with its 
object through the link of consciousness. Three things are happening 
simultaneously: there is the object, the faculty, and the linking 
consciousness. For instance, there is an object to be seen, the visual 
faculty, and the visual consciousness. When those three are present 
simultaneously, then the visual consciousness is working.
Once the perceptual entrances develop, the eyes of the fetus in the 
mothers womb can see visual things, so there is visual contact; the 
ears can hear things, so there is audible contact; the nose can smell 
things, so there is olfactory contact; the tongue can taste flavors, so 
there is the taste contact; and the body feels sensations (heat, cold, 
and so on), so there is physical contact. The mind reacts to those 
things with various feelings and thoughts, so there is mental contact 
based upon the physical sensations. There are two points about contact: 
one is that the three factors of faculty, object and consciousness come 
together. The second is that, once the outside sensory object, the 
sensory organ, and the consciousness associated with that organ come 
together, we have an experience of the outside world, which gives rise 
to the seventh link, feeling.
7. Feeling
In the chain of the twelve links of interdependent origination, one link 
gives rise to the next link; each link is the cause for the next link to 
arise. Once there are the perceptual entrances, there can be sensual 
contact. And once there is contact, then feelings arise. These feelings 
can be either pleasant, unpleasant, or indifferent. For instance, when
28

The Twelve Links
the eye sees something that is beautiful, that creates a pleasant feeling. 
If the visual faculty sees something ugly, then there is an unpleasant 
feeling. Eyes can also see things which are not particularly ugly or 
beautiful, and then there is a neutral feeling or the feeling of indifference. 
The raw quality of feeling good, bad, and indifferent is the seventh 
link, feeling. Feelings such as those of compassion can lead to positive 
karma; feelings such as hate can lead to negative karma.
The twelve links can be grouped in various ways. Looking at these 
links globally, the first two links of ignorance and karmic creation are 
the cause for the next five links of consciousness, name and form, the 
perceptual entrances, contact, and feeling. This means that through the 
main root of ignorance, one made the karmic creations in former lives, 
which then give rise to links three, four, five, six and seven in this life. 
In other words, our present consciousness and the links that follow are 
conditioned by previous ignorance and karmic conditions. The way that 
consciousness is imprinted determines the fourth link of name and form; 
name and form, in turn, give rise to the perceptual entrances. Due to 
the perceptual entrances, there is contact, with the external perception, 
the sense organ, and the consciousnesses coming together, from which 
we get the seventh link, of feeling. Each link leads to the next, but in 
terms of a larger view the first two links relate to past lives, and then 
give rise to the next five links, which have to do with this life. In their 
turn, these five links will be the basis for how one acts in this life, which 
will create future lives. So there is a constant play of causality, on smaller 
and greater levels.
Again, the seventh link is feeling. When there is a pleasant feeling 
through contact with the objective world, there arises a sense of need. 
When one has pleasant feelings, one wants to maintain or continue 
them. This leads to the eighth link, which is grasping.
8. Grasping
A better translation for the eighth link is “involvement”  rather than 
“grasping,”  since it concerns an involvement with the objective world
29

The Twelve Links of Interdependent Origination
that one experiences. This grasping can be part of a certain situation, 
such as being in love and grasping at one’ s loved one, or a feeling that 
one has to have people’ s admiration and respect, or desperately holding 
onto a material possession, such as a house or car or form of 
entertainment. When there is a pleasant feeling, one wishes to keep that 
feeling of pleasantness. Ones mind becomes involved in clinging to this 
subjective experience. Beside clinging and grasping at nice experiences, 
we also reject unpleasant feelings and we want to keep away from 
unpleasant experiences. Involvement can be clinging or rejecting; in 
both there is some kind of involvement with the objective world one 
experiences, because of the way it makes us feel. Actually, there are three 
kinds of involvement: clinging, rejecting, and indifference.
Due to a pleasant feeling, one’ s involvement with that feeling grows 
to a point where one decides that one definitely needs to acquire the 
thing which gives rise to the pleasant feeling. On the other hand, one 
may decide that one needs to get away from the things which give rise 
to unpleasant feelings. This is the ninth link.
9. Adoption
The link of becoming involved with something, either wanting it or 
avoiding it, leads to the ninth link of adoption, in which one makes 
definite plans to get the object of one’ s desire. This could also be a 
decision to eliminate or avoid something one has deemed unpleasant. 
At this stage, the process is still mental. In the tenth link, this decision 
is put into action.
10. Becoming
The tenth link is called “becoming,”  because at this stage all the things 
one actually thinks about one acts on. At this stage we are doing actual 
physical or verbal or mental actions. Since it is necessary for one to 
perform an actual physical action for the karma to ripen at a later time, 
this stage is called “becoming.”  The eighth link of grasping is involved
30

The Twelve Links
with wanting or avoiding something and this leads to the ninth link of 
adoption in which one makes definite plans to get the object of our 
desire or to eliminate or avoid something we have deemed unpleasant. 
In the tenth link, this decision is put into action. Virtuous actions bring 
about positive results, unvirtuous actions bring about negative results. 
Because the fruition of our actions is determined by the action itself, it 
is called “becoming”  and involves physical, mental and verbal karma. 
These actions do not become nothing after they are finished. The way 
we act with our body, speech, and mind sows seeds which bring their 
fruit in the future.
The tenth stage of becoming is one of action; it is one of creation 
of karma. Because of that we come to the eleventh link in this sequence 
of events.
11. Rebirth
Because the actions taken in the tenth link will cause effects in ones 
next lifetime, the eleventh link is called rebirth. The karma that has 
been created will cause rebirth in samsara. Because of this karma we will 
begin a certain type of life, which starts in the womb with the link 
called name and form. One will be born, the body will develop and 
one s life will manifest with all its experiences according to the karma 
accumulated. Some experiences will be good and pleasant, others will 
be difficult and painful. All experiences occur because one has been 
born into a specific state. So birth into a particular life is the basis upon 
which the various experiences in life occur. Because of birth, there will 
be all the various forms of suffering one has during life, which are dealt 
with in the twelfth link.
12. Aging & Death
Although aging and death are two main forms of suffering for all of us, 
this name for the twelfth link— aging and death— stands for all the 
various kinds of suffering, difficulties and pain which take place in life;
31

The Twelve Links o/Interdependent Origination
all the things which are unpleasant, burdensome, and so forth. All are 
there because one has been born, and once one has been born, they are 
inevitable; they are a part of the process of life. Once one is born, one 
begins to age; once one is born, one must die, all of which are the 
inevitable consequences of birth. The last link of aging and death contains 
all the suffering of existence which we call samsara.
The Process o f Interdependent Origination
Through the twelve links of interdependent origination, we saw that 
from the root of ignorance and through the process of the twelve stages 
or links, samsara evolves. Because of ignorance, one makes karmic 
creations. Because of that, one has a conditioned stream of consciousness. 
Because of that particular conditioning, one was born in a certain way. 
Once one was born, one has sense faculties which make contact with 
the world. Consequently, one has feelings. Because one has feelings and 
the interaction of the skandhas, one becomes involved with certain things, 
and so on.
Through the twelve links, we see how samsara develops from the 
first step of ignorance onwards. Each step forms the basis for the next 
step. Ignorance not only forms the foundation of the twelve links, but 
once ignorance begins, it is almost inevitable that the next step will take 
place, and so on, step by step.
We can see that in order to get rid of the twelfth step of aging and 
death, or all the problems of life, we need to get rid of the eleventh step 
of worldly rebirth. In order to get rid of rebirth, we need to get rid of 
the tenth step of becoming; of all the karmic creations which determine 
rebirth. In order to get rid of becoming, we need to eliminate adopting, 
and so on. By taking away any former step, the latter step cannot happen. 
And so we go all the way back to the first step, which is the most 
important one of all— ignorance. In fact, if one can remove ignorance, 
then none of the following links can happen. This brings us back to the 
quote in the “Konchog Chidu Practice”6  where it says, “Thus the 
supremely virtuous one has taught what suppresses the cause of samsara.”
32

The Twelve Links
One of the main points is to realize that this body and this life we 
have now are here because of the things we did in former lives: this 
life is not something that just happened by itself, it is part of an ongoing 
process. Our life is established the way it is now because of all the 
things we did in the past. Just in that same way, what we are doing 
now is conditioning and forming the next life. The process is ongoing.
If we look at this in the terms of the twelve links, we see that links 
three to seven are the results in this lifetime of links one and two which 
belong to the past in general. This means that because of ignorance in 
general and past karma, in this life we have the conditioned consciousness 
which gave rise to the five aggregates. These gave us the capacity to 
experience the objective world through the perceptual entrances and to 
have certain feelings. These links are the result in this lifetime due to a 
cause we created in the past lifetime. Once we have that particular result, 
what we do is determined by links eight, nine and ten. This means that 
because of the feelings we have about certain things, there is involvement, 
adoption, and becoming. In other words, we get involved with our 
experience, get even more deeply involved, and eventually act because 
of our involvement in clinging and rejecting. Therefore, links eight, 
nine, and ten are related to the present lifetime in terms of what we are 
doing now and will determine our future life. This future lifetime is 
related to links eleven and twelve, rebirth, aging, suffering, and death. 
In this way we can see the groupings within the twelve links as they 
relate to the past, the present and the future.
The process of dependent origination is going on all the time; it is 
an unbroken continuum of interaction of many elements. Because it is 
ongoing, we are the way we are due to the past. Because we are the way 
we are now, we are shaping the future. Because it is an ongoing process, 
it is compared to a wheel, the famous analogy for samsara: a wheel that 
spins round and round and round.
This entire process is called “interdependent origination,”  which 
means that things originate from each other and depend upon each 
other. The process is called “ten chin drel-wa”  in Tibetan. “Ten”  means
33

The Twelve Links of Interdependent Origination
“one thing is a basis for another”  and “drel-wa”  means “things are 
connected and related.”  In other words, there is a process of causality. 
W henever som ething happens, it does so because of certain 
circumstances and conditions. If there is a result, there was a cause, 
and wherever there is a cause, there will be a result. Causes do not 
become nothing— if there are causes, results must follow; if there is a 
result, it must be because of a particular cause.
In the explanation of the twelve links, we saw that the middle set of 
links concerns what is happening in this life because of conditions coming 
from past lives. The middle links are the foundation from which we are 
creating the nature of the lives to come.
34

3
The Two M ain Kinds o f Causes
When we look more closely, we find two main kinds of causes. One is 
called “the fundamental cause”  or “the necessary cause.”  This refers to the 
prime cause that must be present for something to happen. For instance, 
if we have a certain kind of flower, it can only come from a certain kind 
of seed and from nothing else. So it is a necessary cause without which 
the result cannot take place. This is what we have been studying up to 
now: which link is the main cause for the next thing to happen.
Besides fundamental causes, there are also what are called 
“accompanying conditions.”  These are all the other factors that can 
modify the quality and the nature of the result. If we go back to the 
example of the flower, we know that a particular seed is the necessary 
cause for a certain flower to manifest. But the quality of the soil, the 
humidity, the light and heat will also affect the production and quality 
of the flower. They are not the fundamental causes, but they affect the 
growth, the character, and the size of the flower to a great extent.
The first link was ignorance. Ignorance is not just there by itself. 
What comes into play are our own senses and the quality of the mind 
that is present simultaneously with ignorance. Depending on what is 
happening within the mind, ignorance might be greater or lesser. So 
there will be ignorance that also depends upon the accompanying mental 
consciousness and circumstances. The second link is karmic creation, a
35

The Twelve Links o/Interdependent Origination
karmic act which takes place. There will be many other incidental 
secondary factors that will qualify that action and have some influence 
on the result. They are the accompanying conditions.
The Accompanying Conditions
The accompanying conditions are the main things which will influence 
the fundamental cause. A group of six accompanying conditions are 
often mentioned: the five elements, or earth, water, fire, wind, space; 
and consciousness.
While these elements may seem simple, they also represent different 
functions. For example, consider our body. The earth element is not 
only the substance of the body, but also the body’ s firmness, its 
materiality. The water element in this context does not apply just to 
water but to all the fluids in the body. The fire element applies to the 
warmth of the body and also to the burning or transformation of food 
into energy. The wind or air element makes the various physical 
movements in the body possible, such as moving an arm, but it also is 
involved in the subtle energies flowing along the meridians. The element 
of space refers to all the cavities of the body and also the mind’ s  
luminosity, which is its awareness and intelligence.
So the earth element keeps the body together as a working whole. 
The water element applies to all of the interactions, the bonding processes 
which take place within the body. The fire element is particularly 
concerned with digestion, the power of transformation of solid food 
into energy within the body, which enables us to accomplish various 
tasks. The wind element is associated with respiration, and the space 
element provides the possibility of dimension. Consciousness is, of 
course, our awareness, our reflection.
The View
In answering the question why one experiences various kinds of happiness 
and suffering, some believe that there is a powerful being, a god, who
36

The Two Main Kinds of Causes
creates all this, who determines who will be happy and who will suffer. 
The Buddhist view is not like that; the Buddhist view is that if the 
causes of suffering have been created, then there will be suffering. It is 
not that some external being has decided to make us miserable for some 
reason. The Buddhist view is that the causes have come together 
completely and manifested their result. Likewise, when we experience 
happiness, it is because the various factors which give rise to happiness 
have come together, not because some being outside ourselves decided 
that we should be happy.
The value of the Buddhist view is that it means that our destiny is 
in our hands. If we want to be happy in the future, then we need to 
gather the causes to obtain the happiness we want. If we do not want to 
suffer, then we need to eliminate anything which can be a cause of 
suffering. In a greater perspective, this also means that our enlightenment 
is in our own hands. If we want to achieve total enlightenment, then we 
must do everything that will lead to enlightenment. If we do these things, 
then we will indeed reach total enlightenment.
The Five Aspects o f Causality
There are five particular points we should be aware of regarding the 
process of results emerging from causes. These points must be understood 
well, otherwise we can understand this process of causality incorrectly. 
To clarify the process of causality, we can examine five different points. 
This is made clear in the following discussion of the five particular 
points of causality.
1. No Permanence. The first point is that in the process of cause 
and evolution there is no permanence, so the cause does not last. This is 
exemplified by a seed giving rise to a shoot. The seed is the fundamental 
cause and the result is the shoot. When the shoot appears, there is no 
longer the seed. It is not as though the seed is permanent and creates a 
shoot as well. When the result is manifest, the cause has ceased to be, 
thus showing there is no permanence of causes.
37

The Twelve Links o/Interdependent Origination
2. No Discontinuity. The second point is that although there is no 
permanence in causes, there is no discontinuity in the process. The 
ceasing of the seed and the becoming of the shoot take place in an 
unbroken process of evolution, i.e., the seed gradually ceases and the 
shoot gradually appears. It is not a discontinuity, so that the seed just 
stops and then the shoot appears. There is always a continuity between 
cause and its effect. This continuity is called “the smoothness of 
transition”  and is compared to a scale; as one arm of a hanging scale 
goes down, the other arm goes up. The smoothness of the evolution of 
a cause producing a result is like that: as the result is coming about, the 
cause is coming to an end.
3. No Transference. The third point is that there is no transference. 
There is no transference from the former to the latter, from the cause to 
the result. The observation that there is no transference is that the very 
character of the cause and result are quite different. In the example of 
the seed and shoot we see that the seed is tiny, hard, has a certain color 
and shape and that the shoot has a different shape, color, taste, texture, 
and so on. There is a difference between the two; they do not have the 
same character at all. A seed which is the causal condition of a plant 
sprouting is not similar in nature to the shoot which is the effect of this 
causal condition. So a cause of a certain magnitude does not necessarily 
create a result of equal magnitude. We cannot think that there is 
transference of identity from the cause to the effect, because their identity 
is very different.
4. A Large Result from a Small Cause. The fourth point is that a 
large result can emerge from a small cause. Some seeds are very tiny and 
the result can be an exceedingly large tree.
3. Correspondence. The fifth point is that there is an infallible 
process of correspondence within the continuum from the cause to the 
result. Infallible process means unfailing, you can guarantee it; 
correspondence means similarity. For example, a wheat seed will produce 
a wheat plant. There is a correspondence between cause and result. 
Infallibility means that a wheat seed will always produce a wheat shoot; 
it can never grow into a rice shoot. A grain of rice can only grow into
38

The Two Main Kinds of Causes
rice and can never accidentally grow into a wheat plant. A specific cause 
produces a specific result.
Similarly, virtuous actions will always produce a similar result, 
happiness. Unvirtuous actions will always give rise to a similar result, 
misery. There is the infallible process which takes place and there is a 
specific correspondence between the cause and the nature of the result.
The Eight Examples
In order to help us understand this more subtle process of 
interdependence, we will examine a series of eight examples. 
Interdependence means that because of one thing another thing takes 
place. Like the five particularities, the eight examples are given so that 
we do not have a wrong understanding of how a cause produces a result.
1. A Teacher and the Student. When a teacher teaches a student, 
there is not a transference of knowledge. It is not that the knowledge 
goes out of the teacher and into the student. If the teacher does not 
teach, the student will not understand; it is because the teacher teaches 
that the student will understand. But some “thing”  is not transferred. 
There is interdependence: the cause is the teachers explanation and as a 
result of that, wisdom will arise in the mind of the student. From a 
former cause, a future result in another being takes place.
2. A Candle and its Flame. When one candle is lit by another 
candle, it is not that the candle flame of the first candle is transferred 
into the second candle. When we light one candle with another candle, 
there is no direct transference of the flame from one candle to the other, 
but it is an interdependent process. Without the first candle s flame, the 
second cannot be kindled.
3. A Mirror and its Reflection. When we see our reflection in a 
mirror, it is not that something comes out of us and is transferred into 
the mirror. Nevertheless, there is infallible and precise interdependence 
between us and the reflection. Whatever is in front of the mirror 
determines the image that will be seen in it. There is an infallible 
correspondence between the object and its reflection in the mirror, but
39

The Twelve Links o/Interdependent Origination
there is not a transference of something from one to the other.
4. A Stamp and its Dye. When one imprints a stamp with dye, the 
print on the paper is there because of the dye and depends upon it. 
There is no transference, because the dye used makes the impression in 
another material in a certain and specific way (with the dye actually 
being imprinted in a mirror image).
5. A Flint and its Sparks. Here we see that cause and effect can 
have a dissimilar nature. When we strike a flint, it produces a spark and 
fire. It is not that the spark and fire are in the flint. But when the flint 
is used in a specific way of interdependence, a spark definitely arises and 
through the spark the actual fire is created. The spark depends upon the 
flint, but the nature of the flint and the fire are not similar.
6. A Seed and its Harvest. We know from the previous examples 
that without a seed there can be no plant. The seed gives rise to the 
shoot, the result. It is not the case that the seed is transferred into the 
shoot, but without the seed (the cause), there definitely cannot be the 
result. It is the same point as no transference, but because of one thing 
another thing occurs.
7. A Fruit and its Taste. If we merely look at a sour fruit, we can 
get a sour taste in our mouth. This does not mean that the sour taste is 
actually transferred to us. Nevertheless, it is because of seeing the 
particular sour fruit we are acquainted with that we remember the taste. 
If we do not see the fruit, we would not reproduce its taste in our mouth. 
There is no transference of the taste from the fruit to the mouth in this 
example, but there is a definite interdependence of the sight of the fruit 
and our salivating through interdependence.
8. A Sound and its Echo. When there is a sound in a cave, there is 
often an echo. It is not that the sound has been transformed into the 
echo, but rather there is the interdependence between the sound, the 
sides of the cave, and our position where we are standing.
By contemplating these eight examples we can get a notion of how 
a certain cause can give rise to a specific result. The result is not something 
that comes from the cause itself; there is no transference, no permanence. 
All five points of causality apply. It is a very subtle process.
40

4
The Relevance o f Interdependence  
fo r the Buddhist Teachings
The teachings on interdependent origination are studied by Buddhists 
in all three vehicles. We may say that there are three vehicles (Skt. yana):  
the shravaka ,  the pratyekabuddhas ,  and the bodhisattva vehicle. The 
shravakas and pratyekabuddhas seek individual liberation from samsara, 
the bodhisattvas seek the liberation of all beings.
The teachings of interdependent origination are particularly studied 
by the pratyekabuddhas, literally the “solitary realizers.”  The 
pratyekabuddhas are practitioners who develop tremendous insight and 
wisdom and from this develop a powerful and natural revulsion for 
samsara. Although they seek out and receive teachings from great masters, 
the pratyekabuddhas prefer to develop and gain wisdom by themselves. 
They do this in particular by studying the process of interdependent 
origination. The pratyekabuddhas may concentrate on this teaching very 
thoroughly in this lifetime and when they die and are reborn, sometimes 
in a future life they may come across something that triggers a memory 
of having studied interdependent origination. For instance, if they go 
to a funeral ground, to which they might well be attracted, they will see 
the rotting corpses. This triggers their memory of interdependence, and 
they think, “ Ah, death is because of aging, aging is because of birth, 
birth is because of the process of becoming,”  and so on. The funeral
41

The Twelve Links o/Interdependent Origination
ground refreshes their memory, and they work their way back through 
the twelve links to the first link of ignorance. They then know that 
ignorance above all needs to be removed, so that they can be liberated. 
Their understanding of ignorance concerns the delusion of a subject, 
the self. Among all the Buddhists, they especially develop a profound 
understanding of the twelve links of interdependent origination.
The understanding of the process of interdependent origination, 
however, is very important for all Buddhists. An understanding of 
interdependent origination helps us understand how things function 
on the conventional level  and also how things function on the ultimate  
level .  By understanding interdependence, we begin to understand the 
power of actions done in our previous lives. When we analyze the links, 
some show what happened in the past, others show what influences the 
present, and still others deal with the present and how it sets the stage 
for the future.
In particular, what we appreciate through an understanding of 
interdependence is that causes produce results, especially that positive 
or negative actions we performed in past lives are the reasons for the 
happiness and suffering that we experience presently. We also begin to 
realize that what we are doing now is setting the stage for our future 
experience. This drives home the message that we need to do only those 
things which create happiness and get rid of all those things which 
cause suffering and difficulties. Because of the nature of 
interdependence— how one thing produces another—we realize that we 
need to give up our disturbing emotions of anger, desire, and so on, 
because they lie near the root of all suffering, which takes place as a 
result of interdependence. Such interdependence arises on a level of 
conventional or relative truth.
Understanding that all things that manifest to our mind are indeed 
interdependent means that we can begin to understand the ultimate 
truth. This is because by studying the way things appear through the 
play of interdependence, we begin to realize that nothing is as solid, as 
real, as concrete, as it seems to be. In fact, things begin to manifest as 
what they really are.
42

The Relevance of Interdependence for the Buddhist Teachings
The Tibetan word for “conventional reality”  is kunzop,  meaning 
literally “totally artificial or fake.”  Everything is a fabrication and its 
very nature depends upon the components of which it is fabricated. No 
phenomenon can exist upon its own. All things depend upon other 
things for the nature they take on at a particular time. By understanding 
interdependence we can also come to understand that all things are 
empty, in that they are devoid of any lasting reality. We can see that 
emptiness (Skt. shunyata)  does not mean a dead emptiness, such as one 
finds in empty space; it means that things only exist in interdependence 
on a conventional level. They have no ultimate existence; they are devoid 
of such existence.
The Buddha gave the sublime teachings on the Perfection ofWisdom  
(Skt. Prajnaparamita ), but most of his followers did not understand 
these teachings at the time. About 500 years later, these particular 
teachings were well and thoroughly understood by the great master 
Nagarjuna. He understood the Prajnaparamita remarkably clearly, not 
just from the level of intellectual understanding but from actual 
experience. He was able to present these teachings thoroughly and 
completely through logical arguments. In particular, he presented the 
Buddhas teaching on emptiness through what are called “the five areas 
of wisdom,”  in one of which interdependence is especially stressed. He 
shows that all phenom ena we experience— each and every 
phenomenon— only exists through dependence upon other things and 
no phenomenon has an essential existence of its own. Through 
demonstrating that things merely exist relatively, he showed how they 
are devoid of an ultimate nature. This is one of the five main ways in 
which he presented emptiness, in reliance on an understanding of inter­
dependent origination. Thus the understanding of interdependent 
origination helps one understand not only conventional reality, but also 
ultimate reality.
43

The Twelve Links o/Interdependent Origination
Interdependence in the Sutras
What comes out of the study of interdependence is the understanding 
that all things appear because all the things we experience are only 
relative and dependent on each other. What we discover in the teachings 
on interdependence is that phenomena depend upon each other; one 
thing depends upon other things for the relative existence it has. We 
come across this fact in the Mahamudra teachings when we begin 
looking for the essential nature of the mind. We do not find any solid 
nature of mind, rather we find emptiness devoid of any inherent nature; 
this emptiness is minds essential nature. Even though we discover 
that, at the same time we are aware that there is an unbroken stream 
of mental manifestation. The emptiness that we find in our mind is 
not a mere nothingness, because our mind is continually changing. 
The manifestation of mind— that is, our unbroken stream of awareness, 
thoughts, and feelings— has no recognizable essence. On the 
conventional level, there is the continuous unbroken interplay of 
interdependence where one thing creates another— things depend upon 
each other. This is how reality is presented in the sutras. From an 
ultimate point of view, however, there is no “one”  essence to be 
found, and relatively everything has its existence through the play 
of interdependence.
To show how one thing depends upon another for its nature, we 
can look at two sticks of incense, one of which is about two inches long 
and one of which is four inches long. The two-inch stick is the short 
one, while the four-inch stick is the long one. However, when we take 
away the two-inch stick and put the four-inch stick next to a six-inch 
stick, we see that now the four-inch stick is the short one and the six- 
inch stick is the long one. We can see that “short”  and “long”  are not 
inherent qualities of the stick, but are simply qualities that rely on the 
objects interdependence on other objects. We would all agree that the 
two-inch one is short and the four-inch one is long, but that the four- 
inch stick is short compared with the six-inch stick. We see that things 
depend upon each other for definition of their qualities.
44

The Relevance of Interdependence for the Buddhist Teachings
There are many relative values like this. Take, for example, good 
and bad: Some things are good compared to others, and vice versa. The 
same is true for beautiful and ugly, here and there, self and other. In all 
cases, the value assigned to something is only a relative value that depends 
upon other things for its meaning. So something is “only”  beautiful 
because in one set of relative values it is “more”  beautiful than other 
things, but compared to other things it may be ugly. The point is that 
nothing is beautiful, nothing is long, nothing is bad in itself; it is only 
one of those qualities in the relative sense.
On a conventional level, things have a particular value. But, from 
an ultimate point of view, we cannot say that this “thing”  is once and 
forever ugly or long, once and forever over there and not here. By 
examining such logical arguments, we can examine in a gross way and 
get some understanding of the relative interplay and the ultimate 
emptiness of phenomena. Therefore, in the sutra method of teaching, 
emptiness is presented by way of logical reasoning.
Interdependence in the Mahamudra
In Mahamudra practice, we approach the same topic slightly differently— 
through meditation. There we come to appreciate that on a relative 
level, our minds thoughts, sensual experience, and appearances come 
and go through a play of interdependence. Here we learn to look directly 
into the nature of what is taking place in the mind. We find that nothing 
has a nature we could ever grasp, no ultimate, lasting essence, as we 
have discovered through the teachings on interdependent origination. 
All things have their relative existence but ultimately nothing has true 
existence at all.
To understand the two aspects of truth— what is relatively true and 
what is ultimately true— is profoundly important.
45


5
The Twelve Links  
A pplied to One's Action
Up to now, we have studied the twelve links of interdependence in the 
context of long-term effect, in relation to past lives which influence this 
life and how this life is shaping the future. There is another way of 
presenting the twelve links, which is in terms of effects over a short 
period of time, by applying the twelve links to one particular action. We 
can do this by taking one example given in the scriptures, which is the 
example of killing.
1. Ignorance. We see that someone kills a person because of 
ignorance, not realizing what a negative thing it is, nor all the karmic 
results that will come to himself from doing it. Generally, ignorance is 
the very nature of the action and its consequences and sets the ground 
for other things to happen.
2. Karmic Creation. If someone kills a person because of ignorance, 
then the actual act of killing is the second link, karmic creation. That 
act does not take place all by itself. Various factors accompany it.
3. Consciousness. The third link is the stream of consciousness of 
the killer at the time, i.e., the motivation he has for killing, the strength 
of how he feels, how he envisions the whole act, and how his 
consciousness is imprinted by the act.
47

The Twelve Links 0/ Interdependent Origination
4. Name and Form. That consciousness and the act of killing are 
accompanied by the fourth link, so the five aggregates of form, feeling, 
cognition, mental events, and consciousness take part in the action.
5. The Six Perceptual Entrances. The six perceptual entrances also 
play their part, because during the act of killing there is seeing, hearing 
and the general play of the sensual consciousnesses.
6. Contact. In this particular example, the actual contact takes place 
when the person is struck with the weapon and the deed is done.
7. Feeling. The seventh link is the feeling in the mind of the killer 
at that time; whether he feels great suffering or pleasure in doing the 
act.
8. Grasping. This link is the particular feeling of satisfaction or 
aversion in carrying out the action.
9. Adoption. This link is the continuing process of this act of killing. 
The killer does not stop half-way through but carries out the act to the 
end.
10. Becoming. The tenth link covers the whole action, i.e., once 
the action is being done, then the killer has created the karma which 
will produce a result.
11. Birth. Birth applies to that particular life and the consequences 
to the killer in the future.
12. Aging and Death. Aging and death apply to both the end of 
that life and also to the end of the particular action.
The Three Groups o f the Twelve Links
The twelve links of interdependence we have been studying can be placed 
in three groups, showing that they have three types of character.
1. Defilement. The three links of ignorance (link 1), involvement 
(link 8), and adoption (link 9) are part of defiled mind and are therefore 
connected to the disturbing emotions (Skt. kleshas).  The three main 
disturbing emotions are attachment and aversion (links 8 and 9) and 
ignorance (link 1).
48

The Twelve Links Applied to One’ s Action
2. Action. The word karma literally means action, which is connected 
to link 2 (karmic creation) and link 10 (becoming).
3. Suffering. The remaining links are suffering, which is connected 
to links 3 (consciousness), 4 (name and function), 5  (perceptual 
entrances), 11 (birth) and 12 (aging and death).
The Conventional and Ultimate Aspect
In the sutra tradition the twelve links are more closely related to the 
conventional truth than the ultimate truth, because the conventional 
level deals with how most persons actually experience the world. One 
understands that a flower comes from a seed and this is the truth about 
the relative process of manifestation. This is the truth on a relative level. 
The ultimate truth in this system is presented as a remedy to ignorance 
and the suffering created by the twelve links. With the Mahamudra 
teachings, we are concerned mostly with the ultimate truth which we 
develop by examining our mind directly.
Understanding how things happen on the conventional level of 
perception is very important, it encourages us to develop virtuous conduct 
of body and speech. It is the understanding of how things happen on 
the conventional level that gives rise to great love and compassion for 
others; love in wishing others to be happy and compassion in wishing 
others be free of relative suffering. From that point of view, the ultimate 
level is understanding how things take place on the conventional level, 
and it is most important.
49

The Twelve Links and Their Analogies
1. Ignorance (Skt. avidya)
A blind old woman
2. Karmic Creation (Skt. samskara)
A potter moulding a pot
3. Consciousness (Skt. vijnana)
A monkey looking out of a window
4. Name and Form (Skt. namarupa)
A man rowing a boat
5. The Perceptual Entrances (Skt. ayatana)
A prosperous looking house
6. Contact (Skt. spars ha)
A man and woman embracing each other
7. Feeling (Skt. vedana)
An arrow piercing the eye
8. Grasping (Skt. trishna)
A drunken man
9. Adoption (Skt. upadana)
A monkey plucking fruits
10. Becoming (Skt. bhava)
A pregnant woman
11. Rebirth (Skt. jati)
The birth of a child
12. Aging and Death (Skt . jaramarana)
A corpse being carried to cremation
50

The Six Realms o f Samsara
Name As pictured in thangkas
HIGHER REALMSObstacle
God realm 
(Skt. dev a)The celestial paradises are 
shownPride
Jealous god realm The jealous gods involved 
(Skt. asurd)  in conflict with the gods.Jealousy
EASIEST REALM TO ATTAIN ENLIGHTENMENT
Human realm Human beings in their houses The five 
practicing the dharma disturbing
emotions
LOWER REALMS
Animal realm Animals on earth Ignorance
Hungry ghost 
(Skt. preta)Ghosts with large bellies and 
very small mouths and necksDesire
Hell Realm Beings being tortured in hot 
and cold realmsAnger
51


Notes
1 . The meditation of Mahamudra is the principal meditation of the Kagyu
lineage of Tibetan Buddhism. This is the meditation of looking directly 
at mind.
2. We prefer to use the term emptiness rather than voidness for the Sanskrit
word shunyata, because this refers to the emptiness of inherent existence 
of mind which has the quality of salwa  or intelligence or a knowing, 
whereas voidness implies a dead nothingness.
3‘  Buddhists believe that this world is not solid and real as it appears. What 
we experience is the conventional level of reality (Tib. kunzop ), not the 
ultimate reality (Tib. dondam).  A modern example which helps explain 
this difference is if we look at a wooden table we see a solid object that is 
brown. This is the conventional truth and everyone will agree with us 
that the table looks solid. However, a physicist would tell us that the 
table is actually made up of atoms moving at high speeds and that the 
table is actually 99.99% empty space with the color brown being nothing 
other than a certain wavelength of radiation which looks “brown”  to human 
eyes. This then is closer to the ultimate level of reality.
4 - The three vehicles are: Hinayana, Mahayana, and Vajrayana, which are 
described in much greater detail in Thrangu Rinpoche’ s The Three Vehicles  
o f Buddhist Practice.  Namo Buddha Publications.
5  What is meant here is that thoughts and feelings when analyzed in meditation 
do not seem to come from anywhere, they don’ t seem to stay anywhere, 
and they don’ t seem to go anywhere. Furthermore, our mind is not a 
solid entity, but rather like a stream of thoughts and feelings. So ultimately 
mind is not solid and real like a rock, which takes up space and has a
53

The Twelve Links o/Interdependent Origination
beginning, existence, and an end so the mind is “empty of inherent 
existence.”  However, our mind is not empty like “empty space”  because 
our mind has awareness and intelligence which is called “clarity”  (Tib. 
salwa).  So the mind is not completely empty, so we say that it is empty of 
inherent existence.
6 The Konchog Chidu is a Vajrayana Padmasambhava practice which is 
practiced in most of Thrangu Rinpoche’ s  retreats.
54

Glossary o f Terms
Afflictions This is another name for the kleshas or negative emotions. See 
kleshas
Aggregates, five (Skt. skandha ,  Tib. phungpo nga)  Literally “heaps.”  These are 
the five basic transformations that perceptions undergo when an object is 
perceived. First is form, which includes all sounds, smells, etc., everything 
that is not thought. The second and third are sensations or feeling (pleasant 
and unpleasant, etc.) and identification or cognition. Fourth is mental 
events, which actually include the second and third aggregates. The fifth 
is ordinary consciousness, such as the sensory and mental consciousnesses.
Atman Sanskrit for a permanent “self”  which exists after death.
Ayatanas See perceptual entrances.
Bodhisattva (Tib. chang chup sem pa)  An individual who is committed to the 
Mahayana path of practicing compassion and the six paramitas in order 
to achieve buddhahood and free all beings from samsara. More specifically, 
those with a motivation to achieve liberation from samsara and are on 
one of the ten bodhisattva levels that culminate in buddhahood.
Conventional level (Tib. kunzop)  There are two truths: relative or conventional 
and ultimate or absolute truth. Relative truth is the perception of an 
ordinary (unenlightened) person who sees the world with all his or her 
projections, based on the false belief in ego.
Dharmata (Tib. cho nyi)  Dharmata is often translated as “suchness”  or “the 
true nature of things”  or “things as they are.”  It is phenomena as it really 
is or as seen by a completely enlightened being without any distortion or 
obscuration, so one can say it is “reality.”
Dhatu (Skt., Tib. kham)  There are five elements forming everything in the
55

The Twelve Links o/lnterdependent Origination
world according to Buddhism: earth, water, fire, wind, and space (or ether). 
The internal elements are the same but have a property associated with 
them, so they are: earth (solidity), water (fluidity), fire (heat), wind 
(movement), and space (the vacuities within the body).
Disturbing emotion (Tib. nyon mong,  Skt. klesha)  The emotional obscurations 
(in contrast to intellectual obscurations) which are also translated as 
“afflictions”  or “poisons.”  The three main kleshas are passion or 
attachment, aggression or anger; and ignorance or delusion. The five 
kleshas are the three above plus pride and envy or jealousy.
Eighteen elements see perceptual entrances.
Hinayana (Tib. tekpa chung wa)  Literally, the “lesser vehicle.”  The term refers 
to the first teachings of the Buddha which emphasized the careful 
examination of mind and its confusion.
Human realm see six realms & three realms.
Interdependent origination (Skt. pratityasamutpada,  Tib. ten drel)  The principal 
that nothing exists independently, but comes into existence only in 
dependence on various previous causes and conditions. There are twelve 
successive phases of this process that begin with ignorance and end with 
old age and death.
Kagyu (Tib.) One of the four major schools of Buddhism in Tibet. It was 
founded in Tibet by Marpa and is headed by His Holiness Karmapa. The 
other three are the Nyingma, the Sakya, and the Gelukpa schools.
Karma (Tib. lay) Literally “action.”  Karma is a universal law that when one 
does a wholesome action, one’ s circumstances will improve and when one 
does an unwholesome action, negative results will eventually follow.
Karmapa The title of seventeen successive incarnations of Dusum Khyenpa 
who have headed the Karma Kagyu school of Tibetan Buddhism.
Madhyamika (Tib. u ma)  This is a philosophical school founded by Nagarjuna 
in the second century. The main principle of this school is proving that 
everything is empty of self-nature using rational reasoning.
Mahamudra (Tib. cha ja chen po)  Literally, “great seal”  meaning that all 
phenomena are sealed by the primordially perfect true nature. This form 
of meditation is traced back to Saraha (tenth century) and was passed 
down in the Kagyu school through Marpa. It is, to greatly simplify, the 
meditation of examining mind directly.
Mahayana (Tib. tek pa chen po)  Literally, the “great vehicle.”  These are the 
teachings of the second turning of the wheel of dharma, which emphasize 
shunyata, compassion, and universal buddha nature.
56

Glossary of Terms
Nagarjuna (Tib. ludrup)  An Indian scholar in the second century who founded 
the madhyamika philosophical school which emphasized emptiness.
Nidana chain Sanskrit for the twelve phases of interdependent origination.
Nirvana (Tib. nyangde)  Literally, “extinguished.”  Individuals live in samsara 
and with spiritual practice can attain a state of enlightenment in which 
all false ideas and conflicting emotions have been extinguished. This is 
called nirvana. The nirvana of a Hinayana practitioner is freedom from 
cyclic existence, an Arhat. The nirvana of a Mahayana practitioner is 
buddhahood, free from extremes of dwelling in either samsara or the 
perfect peace of an Arhat.
Perceptual entrances (Skt. ayatanas ,  Tib. kye che)  These are the six sensory 
objects, such as a sight, a sound, a smell, a taste, and body sensation; the 
six sense faculties, such as the visual sensory faculty, the auditory sensory 
faculty, etc. and the six sensory consciousnesses, such as the visual 
consciousness, the auditory consciousness, etc. They make up the eighteen 
constituents of perception.
Perfection of Wisdom. (Skt. Prajnaparamita ,  Tib. sherab chi parol tu chin pa)  
The Buddhist literature outlining the Mahayana path and emptiness 
written mostly around the second century.
Pratyekabuddha (Tib. rang sang gye )  Literally, solitary realizer. A realized 
Hinayana practitioner who has achieved the knowledge of what reality is, 
but who has not committed him or herself to the bodhisattva path of 
helping all others.
Rinpoche Literally, “ very precious”  and is used as a term of respect for a Tibetan 
guru.
Shamatha or tranquility meditation (Tib. shinay)  This is basic sitting meditation 
in which one usually follows the breath while observing the workings of 
the mind while sitting in the cross-legged posture.
Samsara (Tib. kor wd)  Conditioned existence of ordinary life in which suffering 
occurs because one still possesses attachment, aggression, and ignorance. 
It is contrasted to nirvana.
Six perceptual entrances See perceptual entrances.
Six realms of samsara (Tib. rikdruk ) These are the possible types of rebirths 
for beings in samsara and are: the god realm in which gods have great 
pride, the jealous god realm in which the jealous gods try to maintain 
what they have, the human realm which is the best realm because one 
has the possibility of achieving enlightenment, the animal realm
57

The Twelve Links o/Interdependent Origination
characterized by stupidity, the hungry ghost realm characterized by great 
craving, and the hell realm characterized by aggression.
Skandha (Tib. pung pa)  See aggregates.
Shravaka (Tib. nyen tho)  Literally “those who hear”  meaning disciples. A type 
of realized Hinayana practitioner (arhat) who has achieved the realization 
of the nonexistence of personal self.
Shunyata (Tib. tongpa nyi)  Usually translated as voidness or emptiness. The 
Buddha taught in the second turning of the wheel of dharma that external 
phenomena and internal phenomena, or the concept of self or “I,”  have 
no real existence and therefore are “empty.”
Sutra (Tib. do) These are the Hinayana and Mahayana texts which are the 
words of the Buddha. These are often contrasted with the tantras, which 
are the Buddhas Vajrayana teachings, and the shastras, which are 
commentaries on the words of the Buddha.
Sutrayana The sutra approach to achieving enlightenment, which includes 
the Hinayana and the Mahayana.
Tantra (Tib. gyii)  One can divide Tibetan Buddhism into the sutra tradition 
and the tantra tradition. The sutra tradition primarily involves the 
academic study of the Mahayana sutras, and the tantric path primarily 
involves practicing the Vajrayana practices. The tantras are primarily the 
texts of the Vajrayana practices.
Tantra path This is the path of the Vajrayana.
Theravada School (Tib. neten depa)  A school, generally practicing the Hinayana, 
which is the foundation of Buddhism and which emphasizes the careful 
examination of mind and its confusion.
Three realms These are three categories of samsara. The desire realm includes 
existences where beings are reborn with solid bodies due to their karma 
ranging from the deva paradises to the hell realms. The form realm is  
where beings are reborn due to the power of meditation; and their bodies 
are of subtle form in this realm. These are the meditation paradises. The 
formless realm is where beings due to their meditation (samadhi), have 
entered a state of meditation after death and the processes of thought and 
perception have ceased.
Ultimate level (Tib. dondam)  The ultimate truth, which can only be perceived 
by an enlightened individual, is that all phenomena both internal (thoughts 
and feelings) and external (the outside physical world) do not have any 
inherent existence.
58

Glossary of Terms
Vajrayana (Tib. dorje tek pa)  There are three major traditions of Buddhism 
(Hinayana, Mahayana, Vajrayana) The Vajrayana is based on the tantras 
and emphasizes the clarity aspect of phenomena and is mainly practiced 
in Tibet.
Vipashyana meditation (Tib. Iba tong)  Sanskrit for “insight meditation”  This 
meditation develops insight into the nature of mind. The other main 
meditation is shamatha meditation.
Yana (Tib. tek pa)  Literally “ vehicle,”  but refers here to a level of teaching. 
There are three main yanas (see Hinayana, Mahayana, and Vajrayana).
59

M editation Centre Information
For more information and instruction 
please contact one of the following centres.
Rumtek Monastery  
International Seat of His Holiness 17th Karmapa Urgyen Trinley Dorje
Sikkim, INDIA
Sherab Ling Buddhist Institute :  Seat of His Eminence Tai Situpa 
Kangra District, Himachal Pradesh, 176-125, INDIA 
Ph: (01894) 63013/63757
New Zealand Australia
Karma Choeling Buddhist Monastery  
66 Bodhisattva Road 
RD1 Kaukapakapa 
Ph: 09 420 5428
www. kagy u.  o rg. nz
Karma Thigsum Choeling  
PO Box 3160 
Christchurch 
Ph: 03 384 4626
Kagyu Samten Choling  
PO Box 917 
Gisborne 
Ph: 06 867 1956Kagyu Thigsum Chokyi Ghatsal  
PO Box 235, Newstead 
Tasmania
Ph/fax: 03 6334 9680
Karma Tashi Choling  
P.O. Box 973 
Bega, NSW 2550 
Ph: 02 6496 7169
Kagyu E- Vam Buddhist Institute  
673 Lygon Street,
Carlton North, Vic. 3054 
Ph: 03 9387 0422
For a list of Karma Kagyu Centres worldwide, contact:
Karma Triyana Dharmachakra 
352 Meads Mt Rd, Woodstock, New York 12498 
(914) 679-5906, email office@kagyu.org www.kagyu.org
Kagyu Samye Ling Monastery & Tibetan Centre
Eskdalemuir, Langholm, Dumfriesshire, Scotland, DG13 OQL 
(013) 873 73232, email scotland@samyeling.org www.samyeling.org
60

Other publications from  
Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal
A Guide to Shamatha Meditation  
Buddhist Conduct: The Ten Virtuous Actions  
The Life o f the Buddha &  The Four Noble Truths  
The Twelve Links o f Interdependent Origination  
Teachings on the Practice o f Meditation  
Four Foundations o f Buddhist Practice  
The Three Vehicles o f Buddhist Practice  
The M iddle Way Meditation Instructions  
Ascertaining Certainty in the View  
The Two Truths  
Progressive Stages o f Meditation on Emptiness  
Beautiful Song ofM arpa the Translator  
Transcending Ego: Distinguishing Consciousness from Wisdom  
An Introduction to Mahamudra Meditation  
An Overview o f the Bardo Teachings  
The Five Buddha Families and the Eight Consciousnesses  
The Four Dharmas o f Gampopa  
Aspirational Prayer for Mahamudra  
Showing the Path o f Liberation  
Medicine Buddha Teachings  
Journey o f the M ind: teachings on the bardo 
The Essence o f Creation &  Completion  
Mahamudra Teachings  
The Aspiration Prayer o f Mahamudra  
Pointing Out the Dharmakaya  
The Life ofTilopa &  The Ganges Mahamudra  
A Spiritual Biography ofM arpa the Translator  
Rechungpa, A  Biography o f Milarepds Disciple
Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal 
PO Box 6259, Wellesley St, Auckland, New Zealand 
Email: orders@greatliberation.org Website: www.greatliberation.org
61

< 3 %iz4 Z < 9 /2 £  Z/^ Prayer for the Glorious Lama , , Scholarii and Siddha i
1Thrangu Tulku, Karma Lodro Lungrik M away Senge 1
1 The Youthful Vitality o f Immortal Nectar 1
iIn Praise of Amitayus13 OM SWASTI DZI WEN TU3The dharmakaya, free o f elaboration is ever stable and never destroyed. g
Amitayus, your speech is the melodious sound o f the nada, g
the invincible vajra. E>3Through an enlightened mind that sees all possible phenomena
Perfect Guide, you accomplish all goodness.
iIn Praise of Thrangu Rinpoche 13 From the golden age arose a new mansion o f clouds 1 >poised in the depth o f space;
pMay you remain for a long, long time.
5Creating festive occasions for beings to increase their merit. g
May you remain for a long, long time. g
Through the blooming, fu ll lotus o f your flawless knowledge, g >
pYour writings are suffused with great kindness and compassion.
3Through limitless abilities, you satisfy
a multitude o f beings seeking liberation. g
Guide o f beings, may your life be long. g >
pThrough explaining the Dharma, you release beings
3from the tangled net o f ignorance and confusion g
3In debate, you defeat the opponents bold stance. g3Our minds are carried away with joy by the nature o f your writings.p You o f genuine and powerful speech, may your life be long.3Rising from the jeweled ocean o f your immeasurable merit, g3the white moon, clear mandala o f your wisdom. g
<! Pours forth nectar that is the light o f your activity. g>ILion o f speech, teaching scripture and reasoning, may your life be long.1m

3 %|
The Dedication(
y 5j/ churning an ocean o f milk with good intentions,
<17 7 ^  words o f aspiration-a white lotus garland-come to the surface 1 >JlProtector ;  through the merit o f offering this R
to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas.< 1 May the benefit o f your life last for hundreds of eons. H< 1Glorious Lama, through the power o f the truth of the Victorious One. 1 >$ 1Amitayus, and the power o f a good connection with this sincere, f£
pure intention.£i May your life remain stable until the end of the world.% lMay the vitality o f all the four, perfectly flourish.
3(Dharma, wealth, enjoyment, and liberation). g
PThis prayer was requested by the one responsible for Nenang Monastery,siLamaTsewangTashi, who offered representations of the Buddhas body,
speech, and mind, and was written by the i>
XVIIth Karmapa, UgyenTrinley Dorje
during a fine waxing moon of Saga Dawa. ¡<
SHUBHAM. R
iMay it be a cause for virtue. I

Care o f Dharma Books
Dharma books contain the teachings of the Buddha; they have the power to 
protect against lower rebirth and to point the way to Liberation. Therefore, 
they should be treated with respect, kept off the floor and places where people 
sit or walk, and not stepped over. They should be covered or protected for 
transporting and kept in a high, clean place separate from more “ordinary”  
things. If it is necessary to dispose of Dharma materials, they should be burned 
with care and awareness rather than thrown in the trash. When burning Dharma 
texts, it is considered skilful to first recite a prayer or mantra, such as OM, AH, 
HUNG. Then you can visualize the letters of the text (to be burned) being 
absorbed into the AH, and the AH being aborbed into you. After that you can 
burn the texts.
These considerations may be also kept in mind for Dharma artwork, as well as 
the written teachings and artwork of other religions.


Ph il o s o p h y / Ea s t e r n  Re l ig io n s
The T welve  L inks  of 
Interdependent  O rigination
When the Buddha taught, he said that 
achieving enlightenment is due entirely 
to receiving correct teachings and then 
on how diligently one implements these 
teachings.
O ne may ask, how  does this whole 
phenomenal world work? The Buddha 
taught that it all follows the process of 
Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche interdependent origination in which one
action or event causes another event, which causes another 
event and so on.
In personal terms interdependent origination explains how our 
happiness and suffering in our present life is the result of actions 
in our previous lives. This process proceeds through twelve links 
and each of these links or phases is explained in detail here.
Cover: W heel o f Life Thangka
© 2001 Namo Buddha Publications 
& Zhyisil Chokyi Ghatsal Publications 
ISBN Number: 1-877294-13-6
9781877294136

