

VIVID AWARENESS 
THE MIND INSTRUCTIONS OF 
KHENPO GANGSHAR 
KHENCHEN THRANGU 
TRANSLATED AND EDITED BY 
David Karma Choephel 
SHAMBHALA 
Boston & London 
2011 
Shambhala Publications, Inc. 
Horticultural Hall 
300 Massachusetts Avenue 
Boston, Massachusetts oius 
www.shambhala.com 
© 2on by Khenchen Thrangu 
In the appendix, "Naturally Liberating Whatever You Meet: 
Instructions to Guide You on the Profound Path" is translated by Erik 
Perna Kunsang © Rangjung Yeshe Translations & Publications, 1989. 
Revised in 2009. 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in 
any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including 
photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval 
system, without permission in writing from the publisher. 
9 8 7 6 S 4 3 2 I 
FIRST EDITION 
Printed in the United States of America 
@This edition is printed on acid-free paper that meets the 
American National Standards Institute Z39·48 Standard. 
OThis book was printed on 30% postconsumer recycled paper. 
For more information please visit www.shambhala.com. 
Distributed in the United States by Random House, Inc., 
and in Canada by Random House of Canada Ltd 
Designed by Steve Dyer 
LIBRARY OF CoNGRESS CATALOGING-IN-PUBLICATION DATA 
Thrangu, Rinpoche, 1933-
Vivid Awareness: the mind instructions ofKhenpo Gangshar/Khenchen 
Thrangu; translated and edited by David Karma Choephei.-Ist ed. 
p. em 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
ISBN 978-I-S9030-8I6-S (pbk.: alk. paper) 
1. Mahamudra (Tantric rite). 2. Rdzogs-chen. I. Gangshar, Khenpo, 
1925-19S8 or 9· II. Choephel, David Karma. III. Title 
BQ7699.M34T476 2011 
294·3'443s-dc22 
2010029800 
CONTENTS 
Foreword 
Translator's Introduction 
Preface 
PART ONE 
Helpful Advice for Good Times and Bad 
1. Prophecies of Hidden Lands 
2. Recognizing Our Good Fonune 
3· The General Preliminaries 
PART TWO 
The Special Preliminaries: The Analytic 
Meditation of a Pandita 
4· The Foundation: Karma, Cause, and Result 
5· The Importance of Mind 
6. Appearances and Mind 
7· Looking at the Mind 
8. A Summary of the Analytic Meditation 
of a Pandita 
PART THREE 
The Resting Meditation of a Kusulu 
9· Devotion and Stability 
10. Getting Right Down to Meditation 
n. The Benefits of the Kusulu's Meditation 
12. Distinguishing Mind and Awareness 
v vii 
IX 
Xlll 
3 
19 
30 
45 
62 
78 
94 
107 
113 
121 
133 
154 
CONTENTS 
PART FOUR 
Following Through in Our Lives 
13. Taking the Situations of Our Lives as the Path 169 
14· Taking Joy and Sorrow as the Path 175 
15. Taking Pain and Illness as the Path 179 
16. Taking Afflictions and Emotions as the Path 182 
17. Taking the Bardo as the Path 199 
18. Closing Words 210 
Appendix: The Texts of Khenpo Gangshar 215 
The Concise Mind Instructions Called Naturally 
Liberating Whatever You Meet 217 
Naturally Liberating Whatever You Meet: 
Instructions to Guide You on the 
Profound Path 221 
Bibliography 234 
Index 235 
VI 
FOREWORD 
EvER SINCE MY YOUTH, I have loved to hear stories of Khenpo 
Gangshar. His personality and wisdom are truly unique, and his 
teachings combine profound experience and complete practicality. 
He was a root guru to my father, Vidyadhara the Venerable Chogyam 
Trungpa Rinpoche, and a pivotal teacher for the Venerable Thrangu 
Rinpoche. 
In the summer of 2001, I was able to visit Tibet and I walked and 
meditated in some of the meadows and caves where Khenpo Gang­
shar taught. I reflected on how such a great master trained his pupils 
in the profound view of dzogchen. This land of Tibet, with its snow­
capped mountains and vast plains, is unparalleled in its beauty and 
ruggedness. It was in this environment that the Vidyadhara Trungpa 
Rinpoche and Thrangu Rinpoche received the most precious teach­
ings that are held in the Tibetan Buddhist tradition. I'm extremely 
delighted that this book, Vivid Awareness: The Mind Instructions of 
Khenpo Gangshar, is available in the West, since the increase of ma­
terialism and the overwhelming power of strong emotions has not 
lessened since the time of Khenpo Gangshar, but has increased. He 
forewarned that this was a time of change, and in order to not be 
overwhelmed and seduced by the negativity of modern speed, it is 
essential to understand one's mind. This text dearly lays out the step­
by-step process of how one begins that journey. The instructions con­
tained within it are both profound and simple. 
The commentary that Thrangu Rinpoche has done is both lucid 
and incredibly penetrating. We are fortunate to have an actual dis­
ciple of Khenpo Gangshar who has mastered these teachings to both 
explain and demonstrate how l!nlightenment can manifest in our 
Vll 
FOREWORD 
mind and in our life. The translation itself is fluid and accessible. 
Thus this book is an excellent ode to Khenpo Gangshar. 
One of the essential hallmarks of Khenpo Gangshar's teachings 
is his instruction for recognizing the nature of one's own mind. Not 
only does this lead to confidence in one's basic state of being, but it 
allows for the ability to not be swayed by the vicissitudes of life, and 
to remain forthright in all one's activities, constantly remaining in a 
state of sacredness. In order to do this, one must understand thoughts 
and emotions, and be able to accurately pinpoint the continuum of 
wisdom throughout all states of mind, whether high or low. This un­
fabricated wisdom is always present. This is carefully and beautifully 
explained in both Khenpo Gangshar's essential instructions, and by 
the wonderful elucidation of the Venerable Thrangu Rinpoche. 
Also what is evident in this book is the unique inseparability of 
mahamudra and ati. These two profound traditions are one and the 
same. Therefore this book is an excellent guide for all of us who are 
traveling on the path of awakenment. 
SAKYONG MIPHAM RINPOCHE 
February 2010 
VIII 
TRANSLATOR'S 
INTRODUCTION 
IT 1 s THE NATURE of being alive that we encounter many differ­
ent situations. Sometimes things go well for a while. Sometimes they 
don't, and we feel dissatisfaction, pain, or even misery. Sometimes 
things may seem good on the outside, but we still cannot find lasting 
happiness and comfort on the inside. This is just the nature of sam­
sara, and it is natural to want to find relie£ 
This is why the Buddha taught the Dharma in general, and in par­
ticular why he taught mind instructions-instructions on how to 
stop turning our attention outward to all the things that distract us 
and elicit negative responses and instead look inside to the vivid and 
dear awareness that is the nature of our minds. These instructions 
were passed down from master to disciple in many Buddhist tradi­
tions including mahamudra and dzogchen, and every once in a while 
there would come a master who would adapt the instructions for 
their own time and situation. One such master was Khenpo Gang­
shar Wangpo, who in the mid-r9sos foresaw the difficulties coming 
in Tibet and realized that he had to teach these instructions in order 
to help people who would soon be engulfed in turmoil. One of these 
people was Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche. 
Thrangu Rinpoche met Khenpo Gangshar in the summer of 1957 
when Khenpo Gangshar went to Thrangu Monastery in eastern 
Tibet. While there, Khenpo Gangshar gave these instructions, which 
are a distillation of the essential points of the practices of both maha­
mudra and dzogchen. Later they were written down, first in a very 
short form and then as the slightly longer text known as "Naturally 
IX 
TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION 
Liberating Whatever You Meet." What makes them so beneficial for 
our time is that Khenpo Gangshar presents them in a way that is easy 
for anyone to understand and put into practice. Although many great 
masters, including Chogyam Trungpa Rinpoche and Tulku Urgyen 
Rinpoche, were students ofKhenpo Gangshar, few living masters re­
main who heard Khenpo Gangshar give these instructions in his own 
voice. That makes these teachings of Thrangu Rinpoche especially 
precious: they are a direct and living link between ourselves and a 
forceful, dynamic master whose teachings benefited innumerable 
people in difficult times in Tibet and beyond. 
In 2007, Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche taught the mind instruc­
tions of Khenpo Gangshar on four separate occasions. Although pre­
viously Rinpoche had not often taught them, he said these were the 
most important teachings he had received in his life. They had been 
the most helpful for him during the times when he faced the great­
est hardships, and Rinpoche spoke of how they could be helpful for 
anyone during both good times and bad. What shone through all the 
teachings was the depth of Rinpoche's conviction in the efficacy of 
these instructions and his devotion to Khenpo Gangshar. 
Each time Rinpoche taught, he emphasized different points and 
drew on different sources not only to explain the instructions but also 
to show how they relate to other areas of Buddhist views and prac­
tice. This book combines all of these teachings into one thorough 
and complete presentation. It opens with Rinpoche's description 
of the history and circumstances in which Khenpo Gangshar gave 
these teachings, and then goes through all of the points of Khenpo 
Gangshar's instructions, including the general preliminary steps that 
we follow to prepare ourselves, the specific preliminaries of inves­
tigating what the mind is like, the actual main practice of resting 
within the nature of the mind, and the follow-through instructions 
on taking all of the different situations we encounter in our lives 
as the path so that we can nurture our recognition of the nature of 
mind and not be overwhelmed by transient circumstances of our 
lives and deaths. Drawing on all different areas of Buddhist philoso­
phy and quoting from memory and from many great masters and 
texts (which can make it difficult to find a source for every citation}, 
X 
TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION 
Rinpoche explains everything clearly and simply so that these in­
structions will be helpful to new and old practitioners alike. 
In this translation, I have used the word intelligence to translate 
the Tibetan word shes rab (Skt. prajiia) and wisdom to translate ye shes 
(jiiana). The actual meaning of shes rab or prajiia is the discernment 
that can distinguish what is from what is not, and its usage in many 
texts as well as in common speech is more akin to the English word 
intelligence. Although the word prajiia is frequently used in English 
translations, when people hear it, there is a tendency to think of 
prajii.a as something special, different, and extraordinary-something 
that we don't ordinarily have but need to get through spiritual prac­
tice. Actually, it is a quality that is inherent in every consciousness we 
experience; we just need to sharpen and develop it through listening, 
contemplating, and meditating, so it seems better to use an ordinary 
English word to indicate this. 
I would like to thank the people whose efforts made this book 
possible, including Erik Perna Kunsang for his gracious assistance 
and permission to use his translation of Khenpo Gangshar's "Natu­
rally Liberating Whatever You Meet," Alexis Shaw and the Orange 
County Vajra Vidya Study Group for transcribing the teachings, and 
the many others who have had a hand in making Khenpo Gangshar's 
texts available and producing this book. 
I hope that all of you who read this book find that practicing these 
instructions gives you tangible benefits in this life; I hope it brings 
you to the ultimate, enduring happiness of buddhahood. May this 
book be a cause for all to bring the greatest benefit to themselves 
and others. 
XI DAVID KARMA CHOEPHEL 
Thrangu Dharmakara Translations 

PREFACE 
THESE DAYS, THERE ARE many people who want to recognize 
the nature of the mind and practice meditation on it, and there are 
also many lamas who point out the nature of the mind. For this rea­
son, I thought it would be especially beneficial if there were some 
mind instructions to help these people. 
The instructions in this book were first taught orally by the great 
scholar and meditation master Khenpo Gangshar Wangpo. He first 
wrote them down in a very short text, which he then elaborated on 
in the longer text called "Naturally Liberating Whatever You Meet." 
But the era in which Khenpo Gangshar lived and wrote this text was 
a time of great conflict and there was a danger that it would be lost 
in the turmoil. Perhaps it is a sign of the merit of his students, or 
perhaps the result of his own activity, that his instructions were not 
lost. It is very fortunate indeed that they were preserved and remain 
in this world. 
Now these instructions have been translated into English, and I 
have full confidence that they will be able help many people all over 
the world. These instructions are not just for academic study; they 
focus on practice. They are a way to tame the greed, aversion, and 
delusion in your mind and bring yourself mental peace and happi­
ness so that you will be able to help yourself and others. I ask you to 
please put them to good use. 
Xlll 

PART ONE 
HELPFUL ADVICE 
FOR GOOD TIMES 
AND BAD 
LONG AGO, MARPA THE TRANSLATOR AND MANY OTHER 
Tibetans went to India to study and learn the Dharma. They made 
the difficult journey to India, studied with great masters, meditated, 
and really learned the Dharma. When they returned to Tibet, they 
taught the instructions they had learned, and so the Dharma spread 
widely in Tibet, where it has flourished until the present day. As a 
result of this, we are now able to enjoy and make use of the Dharma. 
We can study it and contemplate its meaning. We can do meditation 
practice. Our opportunity to do all this comes out of the great kind­
ness of all those great translators and masters of the past. 
Now you have a similar intention to learn something about the 
Dharma. You did not pick up this book to read some great story or 
learn how to be successful in business and get rich. The only mo­
tivation you could possibly have is to learn about the Dharma. It 
I 
is not always easy to study Dharma-you might face some difficul­
ties, financial or otherwise. But studying and practicing the Dharma 
is something that will be very helpful to you and many others for 
generations to come. It will help the Dharma spread in your own 
country and flourish for many hundreds of years to come. This is 
wonderful. 
Whenever we study the Dharma or do any Dharma practice, the 
most important thing is to hav~ a pure motivation. If we have a pure 
motivation, whatever we do with our body, speech, and mind will 
turn out well. But if our motivation is not pure, then even if what 
we do with our body, speech, and mind seems good from the out­
side, it will actually not turn out well in the end. Just starting to read 
this book shows that you want to learn about the Dharma and to 
practice it; it demonstrates that you have some faith and devotion. 
This is a good motivation, but it is important to have a truly vast 
motivation-the motivation ofbodhichitta. Sometimes our motiva­
tion is influenced by our afflictions, and if that is the case, then we 
should get rid of such a motivation. Sometimes our motivation is not 
in any way afflicted or negative, but it is possible that it is just a wish 
to help ourselves. There is nothing terribly wrong about that sort of 
motivation, but it is very limited, and so this also is a motivation that 
we should give up. Instead we should have the motivation to bring 
benefit to all of our former mothers and to all the sentient beings of 
all six realms of samsara who are as limitless as space. It is for their 
benefit that we practice the Dharma. It is for their benefit that we 
need to study the Dharma, so please read these. teachings with the 
pure motivation of bodhichitta. This is the best reason to practice 
the Dharma. 
2 
1 
PROPHECIES OF 
HIDDEN LANDS 
THE TOPIC OF THIS BOOK is some instructions given by a khenpo 
from modern times, Khenpo Gangshar. I received them directly 
from Khenpo Gangshar himself and I found them very helpfUl at 
that time. I met him and received these instructions in August of 1957, 
which was the beginning of the period when I faced the greatest dif­
ficulties and dangers of my life. 
The situation in Kham, the area of eastern Tibet where I am &om, 
grew steadily worse throughout 1957 and 1958, and just over a year 
after receiving these instructions I had to leave my homeland and 
flee Tibet. During that period I faced the danger of losing my life or 
being thrown in prison. There were great hardships, too: sometimes 
we had no food, sometimes we had no clothing or no place to stay. 
I encountered my enemies, and when that happened, the most ben­
eficial Dharma for me was this particular teaching. Remembering 
these instructions and keeping them in mind was extremely helpful 
for me. 
When we think about what happens internally when we experi­
ence such difficulties and suffering, we see that there is a danger that 
anger, jealousy, or another negative emotion will arise in our minds. 
The reason these profound instructions were so helpful for me at that 
time is that they are the antidote for anger, jealousy, and all the other 
afflictions. If at that point I had gotten angry, I might have joined the 
3 
HELPFUL ADVICE FOR GOOD TIMES AND BAD 
war and fought against the Chinese. Many people told me I should 
become a general and lead an army to fight a big battle. Had I done 
so, there would have been the possibility of killing many people or 
committing other misdeeds, and later I would have looked back on 
it with regret. I would have thought, "That was not good. I killed a 
lot of people. I did something terribly wrong and in the end this will 
turn out badly." There could have been no happiness in my life. But 
because of these instructions, I felt no anger, and so I did no wrong­
doing. I did not kill anyone, prepare to kill anyone, or even form the 
intention to kill. That was because of this Dharma teaching. I used 
these instructions as my companion in sorrow and suffering, and be­
cause of that I was able to avoid losing control of myself to the afflic­
tions. This is the great help that these instructions gave me. 
When I look back on those times, I think about how I faced both 
the danger of my enemies and the danger of accumulating bad karma. 
There was a danger that I could have gone down the wrong path. But 
I was able to meet some great lamas, and because of their kindness 
and the instructions they gave me, I think things actually turned out 
rather well. I was not overcome by the afflictions and did not accu­
mulate any ba<;l karma. Even though at that time I experienced many 
difficulties and faced many dangers, I did not conceive of them as 
difficulties or dangers. I feel good about this. 
When anger arises in us, there is a danger that we will be mistaken 
in the moment. We might start to fight, or we might say something 
harsh or unpleasant that we will regret in the future. Thus it is im­
portant that we take control of our minds. If we reduce the intensity 
of the afflictions, it is extremely helpful, and in the future we will be 
able to think, "Things actually worked out back then." 
I have heard other people say similar things, including Beru Sherab 
Palden, who lives at Samye Ling in Scotland. At that time, Sherab 
Palden was in Lhasa, and he heard that war had broken out in Tibet. 
One day he hid himself within a house, looking out through a win­
dow. He had a good rifle and saw that he had a good shot on a Chi­
nese soldier. He had the thought, "I should kill that Chinese," ami so 
he aimed at the soldier. He could have shot at any moment, but then 
he thought, "No, how can I kill a person? That is no good." He then 
4 
PROPHECIES OF HIDDEN LANDS 
put the gun away. Later he said that this was actually very good for­
tune that he did not shoot and kill anyone. It was the kindness of the 
Three Jewels that stopped him. In the same way it is important for 
you to keep control over your mind. If you manage to do so, things 
will turn out for you as well. 
It is quite possible that there will be times when everything is 
happy, peaceful, and wonderful in your life, but it is also possible that 
there will be times when you are unhappy, face difficulties, and expe­
rience a lot of suffering. During the times when you are happy, there 
is a danger that you will fall under the control of your afflictions, 
and there is a similar danger during times when you are unhappy. 
What we need at such times is Dharma practice. When you are ex­
periencing suffering and when you are experiencing happiness, you 
need practice and instructions as a friend in times of need. Doing this 
practice has been helpful for me in my life, and I hope that it will be 
helpful for you, too, in both good times and bad. 
WHERE THESE INSTRUCTIONS CAME FROM 
The profound instructions presented in this book are rather new. 
There are instructions that were given thousands of years ago when 
the Buddha appeared in this world and that the Buddha actually 
spoke with his own mouth. There are also all the instructions from 
the great meditators and great scholars of India. Similarly, there are 
the words of the great scholars and meditators who appeared in Tibet 
both during the initial spread of the ancient Nyingma tradition and 
later during the spread of the newer Sarma tradition. But these in­
structions are not any of those. These orily appeared very recently. 
The person who taught them, Khenpo Gangshar Wangpo, was a great 
scholar who later became a mahasiddha. Looking into the future, 
he saw that in 1958 and 1959 the situation would become very diffi­
cult. He saw that Buddhism would come under attack and that many 
people would experience great hardship. He saw that Dharma practi­
tioners would face many obstacles. He gave these profound instruc­
tions so that they would not be harmed by these difficulties and so 
that they would not suffer. 
5 
HELPFUL ADVICE FOR GOOD TIMES AND BAD 
Khenpo Gangshar was born into the family of the Shechen Gyal­
tsap Gyurme Perna Namgyal, who was one of the main teachers at the 
Shechen Monastery in Kham. The Shechen Gyaltsap's main teacher, 
from whom he received many teachings directly, was Jamgon Kong­
trul Lodro Thaye, the great nonsectarian nineteenth-century master 
who compiled all of the teachings of Tibetan Buddhism into the 
Five Great Treasuries. One of the Shechen Gyaltsap's nephews was the 
great scholar Khenchen Lodro Rabsel, with whom I studied the sutra 
teachings when I was in monastic college. These studies included the 
abhidharma, the middle way, the vinaya, validity and logic, and so 
forth. The Shechen Gyaltsap also had a niece named Otso, who was 
Khenpo Gangshar's mother. She gave birth to him in the Wood-Ox 
year, 1925. 
When he was a young boy, Khenpo Gangshar met the Shechen 
Kongtrul Rinpoche, one of the reincarnations of Jamgon Kongtrul 
Lodro Thaye. The Shechen Kongtrul recognized him as an emana­
tion of a great Indian master and said that he would become an 
exceptional person, so he should be well cared for, but no one be­
lieved this because actually he was quite naughty and rough-they 
doubted any child so badly behaved could possibly become someone 
exceptional. But at some point his potential was awakened and he 
began to study and practice the Dharma. He became quite learned 
and was appointed as a khenpo of Shechen Monastery. He also de­
veloped a very deep and strong meditation practice. Later, when he 
began to give his own particular instructions, which lead to really 
exceptional experiences, people recognized what an exceptional lama 
he was. 
Khenpo Gangshar gave these instructions just before the bad times 
came to Tibet. At that time, some people got ready to fight, saying 
that it was necessary to struggle and resist, but Khenpo Gangshar 
did not agree: he said that to fight would be barbaric and would 
be contradictory to the Dharma. Our motivation to fight could only 
be an unvirtuous motivation sparked by hatred and jealousy. Such 
a motivation is inappropriate for Buddhists and could not bring 
any good. It would only bring us harm, not only in this life but in 
our future lives as well. In particular, if monks were to go to war, 
6 
PROPHECIES OF HIDDEN LANDS 
this would destroy the teachings of the Buddha. This would not be 
something that anyone else had done-we would have destroyed 
Buddhism ourselves, he said. That could not possibly be the right 
thing to do. 
So what did he say we should do at that time? He said that the 
Dharma is not something outside of ourselves. It is inside us, so prac­
ticing within ourselves is the most beneficial thing to do. Buddhism 
does not depend on external things; it depends on taming our own 
minds. If we tame our own minds, Buddhism will not disappear. At 
that time in Tibet and later during the Cultural Revolution, if you 
were to say O¥ MA~I PAD ME HU¥, there was a danger that someone 
might turn you in. But Dharma does not depend upon that. Taming 
our own minds alone is the genuine Dharma. We needed to act in 
accordance with the Dharma. We needed to be patient. We needed 
to be compassionate and have a kind heart. And the best and most 
important way to develop this kind heart is to follow these special 
instructions on looking at the nature of the mind. 
Several years earlier, the Tenth Trungpa Rinpoche, Chokyi Nyin­
che, had gone to Shechen Monastery and formed a good connec­
tion with the Shechen Kongtrul Rinpoche. Because of this, when the 
Eleventh Trungpa tulku, Chogyam Trungpa Rinpoche, needed to re­
ceive the empowerments, instructions, and transmissions for the Five 
Treasuries of Jamgon Kongtrul Lodro Thaye-The Treasury ofTenna, 
The Treasury of Spin'tual Instructions, The Treasury of Kagyu Mantra, 
The Treasury of Knowledge, and The Treasury of the Vast Word-he in­
vited Shechen Kongtrul Rinpoche to Surmang Dutsi Til Monastery 
and received The Treasury of Spiritual Instructions from him. Later 
Trungpa Rinpoche went down to Shechen Monastery and received 
The Treasury ofTenna and The Treasury ofKagyu Instructions. Following 
that, he decided to start a shedra at Surmang Dutsi Til Monastery and 
needed to invite a khenpo. The khenpo he invited was Khenpo Gang­
shar. At that time, Khenpo Gangshar was not in very good health, but 
he thought it would be beneficial for beings and the teachings, so 
he went. He taught Trungpa Rinpoche The Supreme Continuum and 
middle-way philosophy. While teaching The Supreme Continuum, he 
fell ill, and at that time a verse came to him, which he wrote down: 
7 
HELPFUL ADVICE FOR GOOD TIMES AND BAD 
Within the first month, Zing zing zing! 
Within the second, Ururu! 
Within the third month, Sharara! 
Within the fourth month, Trarara! 
Within the fifth month, wails of Sharara! 
Within the sixth, the Chinese shout So! will ring out. 
Within the seventh, they'll control the realm of Tibet. 
If on the cusp of the fifth, seventh, and sixth, 
You do not go to a hidden land, delaying, 
There is no doubt you will be made Chinese. 
His students said this sounded like a prophecy, but he said it was 
nothing. He did not think of himself as a great meditator or teacher. 
He did not see himself as having pure perception or being able to 
make prophecies, so he threw it into a fire, but the paper flew back 
out unharmed. This is how he made the prophecy. 
The meaning of his prophecy was that the situation would get 
worse and worse throughout the first sixth months of the Tibetan 
lunar calendar, but there would be a time in the fifth, sixth, and sev­
enth lunar months-the three months of summer-when we could 
flee to the hidden lands. If we did not make it there, it would be very 
bad. But where were the hidden lands that we should flee to? The 
hidden lands are not lands that are outside of us in any respect, he 
said. The hidden lands refer to knowing the nature of our mind well. 
It is important that our minds not be overcome by the afflictions or 
suffering. The hidden lands are not outside of ourselves; they are our 
own minds. 
These hidden lands had also been prophesied by Guru Rinpoche, 
who had said that there were four hidden lands: Lotus Array in As­
sam; Khenpa Jong, which is in Bhutan; the Land of Rice or Sikkim; 
and Yolmo Ganggi Rawa in Nepal. The prophecy says that those who 
go there will be able to arrive, and that when we reach the hidden 
lands, we will reach the pure lands of the dharmakaya, enjoyment 
body, and emanation body. At that time, some people said that the 
Tibetans should flee to the four hidden lands prophesied by Guru 
Rinpoche. But how could this be possible? If our minds are filled by 
8 
PROPHECIES OF HIDDEN LANDS 
the afflictions and obscurations and we have spent the first part of 
our lives performing misdeeds and unvirtuous acts, it is not possible 
that we could simply travel by foot and somehow arrive in a pure 
realm of the dharmakaya or an enjoyment body. There is no way we 
could get there. But that does not mean that Guru Rinpoche's proph­
ecy is false. 
What Guru Rinpoche's prophecy says is that when we want to go 
to the hidden lands, first we will come to a great river. We could try 
many different ways to cross it, but we will not find any way to cross 
it except for one. What is this one way? On the banks of the river there 
grows a great tree. We need to chop the tree down, but it cannot be 
felled by any ordinary axe or saw. So how can we chop it down? We 
need to dig at the base of the tree, and there at its very root we will 
find a crystal axe. We can use this crystal axe' to fell the tree, and when 
we do, it will fall across the river, becoming a bridge that we can walk 
across. This is how we will be able to cross the river and reach the 
pure land of a dharmakaya, enjoyment body, or emanation body. 
We should not take the words of this prophecy too literally­
otherwise it would be impossible. How is it possible that there is a 
river that cannot be crossed? And how could there be some tree that 
cannot be cut by steel? It is not possible. Even if there were such a tree, 
if it could not be cut by steel, how is it that a crystal axe could cut it? 
If we whacked such a tree with a crystal axe, the axe would shatter 
on the first blow. This is just not plausible. One cannot simply fell a 
tree and walk across it to a pure land. Khenpo Gangshar said that the 
words of the prophecy were actually quite good, but we have to read 
them symbolically, not literally. So what does the great river mean? 
It is the great river of samsara, filled with the afflictions and our bad 
karma. It is something we must cross, but how? We need a method, 
and that method is the tree on the riverbank. What does the tree 
represent? It is the tree of clinging to a self. We need to cut down this 
tree of ego-clinging, which means we need to get rid of it. But after 
we have chopped it down, it becomes something we can use-this 
is what we call "taking ego-clinging as the path." We can practice 
relative bodhichitta, saying, "I am going to attain buddhahood in 
order to bring benefit to all sentient beings." Then we can take our 
9 
HELPFUL ADVICE FOR GOOD TIMES AND BAD 
ego-clinging as the path and use it as a bridge to cross the river of 
samsara and arrive in the great city of omniscience and freedom. 
We cannot chop down the tree of ego-clinging and make it into 
a bridge in the ordinary way. But if we dig next at its roots, we will 
find intelligence that realizes the lack of a sel£ That intelligence is 
the crystal axe. The only place you can find it is at the base of the 
tree of ego-clinging. If we find that intelligence, realize that the self 
actually has no essence, and look at what the nature of the self really 
is, that is the crystal axe. We can then use this crystal axe of the intel­
ligence that realizes selflessness to cut down the tree. Once we have 
cut down the tree of ego-clinging, we can take it as the path to cross 
the river of samsara. That is how we can reach the pure realms of 
the dharmkaya, enjoyment bodies, and emanation bodies. Khenpo 
Gangshar stressed that this means that it is critical for us to practice 
meditation- it is on the basis of our practice that we will be able to 
reach the hidden lands. 
There are many different types of instructions on how to practice, 
but they can be primarily classified into two types: practices that re­
quire effort and practices that are effortless. The instructions that 
require effort include such things as accumulating merit, gathering 
a sangha of monks and nuns, and building temples. But these would 
have been impossible at that time and place. It would have been fool­
ish even to make plans to do so. So what did we need to do at that 
time? We needed to tame our own minds. 
There are many different ways to tame our mind. There are many 
things we can do-engage in creation-stage deity practices, recite lit­
urgies, recite mantras, use our bodies to accumulate merit, and so 
forth. However, many of these are things that we would not have 
had the power to do at that time. What we did have the power to 
do was to take control of our mind. This is something that can be 
done anywhere, in any situation. If we can practice these instructions 
on taking control of our mind, we will not have any suffering, we 
will not experience any fear, and there will be no problem of doing 
any misdeeds. There will not be any difficulties. This is what Khcnpo 
Gangshar said when he gave these instructions, which turned out to 
be extremely helpful fc?r many people. 
10 
PROPHECIES OF HIDDEN LANDS 
I went back to Tibet in the 1980s, and while I was there I met 
many lamas, monks, and Dharma teachers. Many of them had spent 
over twenty years in prison camps undergoing tremendous physical 
suffering. But many of them had also met Khenpo Gangshar and 
received his profound instructions. They were able to contemplate 
these extraordinary instructions, develop renunciation and world­
weariness, and practice. They tried to take control of their minds and 
practice the instructions as much as they could in prison. The more 
they practiced, the more beneficial the instructions were for them. 
Their practice went well, and as a result they did not find their situa­
tion so difficult. Similarly, many people fled Tibet and went to India. 
Fleeing was extremely difficult-there were many worries, great 
fear, and many hardships. But these instructions were helpful for 
them, too. 
Our situation nowadays is not like that. We do not have so many 
· difficulties. We do not have to practice the Dharma in secret. We 
can do creation-stage practices if we want. We can do completion­
stage practices if we want. We can study the Dharma if we want. But 
Khenpo Gangshar said that we should consider these oral instruc­
tions on recognizing the nature of our minds especially important. 
They can help us all individually: when we have temporary difficul-, 
ties and temporary suffering, they can directly help us to deal with 
those problems. Not only that, but if we practice them, they will 
bring great blessings and power that will make it possible for us to 
achieve the ultimate result of buddhahood. They are therefore help­
ful in both the short and long terms. That is why he said that these 
are such excellent and wonderful instructions. 
TERTONS AND TREASURES 
Generally speaking, all Dharma is the same in essence, but each dif­
ferent instruction has its own particular time and place. A Dharma 
teaching that is the most appropriate instruction for a particular time 
and place is especially helpful and has especially great blessings. This 
is the reason why Guru Rinpoche, the great Indian master who was 
instrumental in bringing the Dharma to Tibet, hid so many Dharma 
II 
HELPFUL ADVICE FOR GOOD TIMES AND BAD 
teachings as treasures ( termas). Guru Rinpoche traveled all over Tibet 
hiding these treasures in cliffs, lakes, and other places so that they 
could be found at the time when they would be most helpful and 
would have the most power. Then hundreds of years later a terton -a 
treasure discovere·r-would appear and find the instructions at the 
time when they were most appropriate. 
Khenpo Gangshar, as he said himself, was a terton. There are many 
different types of tertons who have appeared through the centuries, 
and they discovered their treasures in many different ways. Some 
found material treasures and others found Dharma treasures. Those 
who found material treasures would find symbolic items such as a 
vajra, a phurba, an unusual statue, or some other object in a cliff, 
beneath a lake bed, or in another such location. With Dharma trea­
sures, many discovered what are called "yellow papers." Yellow papers 
are the documents that had been written down by Yeshe Tsogyal, 
Guru Rinpoche's consort, who wrote quite a few of these treasures 
in tiny letters. When tertons would discover such a treasure, they 
would copy it down. These are some of the ways tertons have found 
treasures. 
Although Khenpo Gangshar was a terton, he was a different kind 
of terton. He did not find external objects, texts, or anything like that. 
He said himself that he was not someone who revealed treasures from 
external things. Instead, he found the treasure of the nature of his 
own mind within. This made him an extraordinary type of terton. 
Khenpo Gangshar's main student was Chogyam Trungpa Rinpoche. 
One day, when Khenpo Gangshar was giving a teaching at Thrangu 
Monastery, he told us a story about how Trungpa Rinpoche wore some 
jewels-one or two stones or crystals wrapped in a cloth-around his 
neck. The previous Trungpa tulkus had all worn these jewels around 
their necks, and the Eleventh Trungpa also wore them. 
One day when he was young, Chogyam Trungpa Rinpoche took a 
day off. He went to a mountain stream, took off his clothes, and went 
for a swim in the river. When he came out, he had lost the jewels 
and could not find them. The jewels remained lost for one or two 
years until Khenpo Gangshar Rinpoche came to Surmang Dursi Til 
Monastery and gave him some profound instructions. Through these 
12 
PROPHECIES OF HIDDEN LANDS 
instructions, Chogyam Trungpa Rinpoche developed exceptional re­
alization within himself-and during that time he happened to go 
back to the river-and find the jewels. 
There were several different explanations as to why the Trungpa 
tulkus wore these jewels. Some said that they wore the jewels as some 
sort of a protection from difficulties, ghosts, or spirits, but that is 
not the real reason. Some people said that these jewels would protect 
the Trungpa tulkus from weapons, but that also is not the reason. 
The real reason they wore them is that the jewels represent the jewel 
of the mind, which is always present within ourselves. Wearing the 
jewels was a sign of having meditated on the nature of the mind, and 
of having developed realization about how the mind is. This is the 
reason why the successive incarnations of the Trungpa lineage wore 
these jewels around their neck. Just as the previous Trungpa tulkus 
had realized the nature of their minds, so too the subsequent incar­
nations realized the nature of their minds and wore the jewels as a 
symbol of that. 
Just like his predecessors, Chogyam Trungpa Rinpoche wore these 
jewels. But people and their situations are always changing, and when 
Chogyam Trungpa was young, he forgot the nature of his mind and 
the way the dharma nature is. That is when he lost the jewels. Later 
he received Khenpo Gangshar's profound advice and was able to real­
ize the nature of his mind, and that is when he found the jewels. 
All of the various incarnations of the Trungpa tulku lineage were 
exceptional beings with exceptional realization, but sometimes great 
lamas forget things when they take a new body. The reason is that 
they have exchanged bodies. For example, if in your own life you 
develop a problem with your brain, you might forget something you 
used to know. Great lamas did not just have a problem with their 
brain-they exchanged their old brain for an entirely new one! They 
have an entirely new body. They have not lost their internal qualities, 
but they have not yet redeveloped the wisdom. This is why when 
great lamas are young they still need to sit down and learn the al­
phabet. They have a new body and need to develop their qualities, 
but you can tell even at an early age that this is someone with great 
intelligence and great wisdom. This is someone whose experience 
13 
HELPFUL ADVICE FOR GOOD TIMES AND BAD 
will naturally blossom and develop. This is just the nature of inter­
dependence. 
Khenpo Gangshar discovered the treasures of the mind by help­
ing students to realize the nature of their own minds-the cause of 
liberation and omniscience that is present as the essence of their own 
mind stream. We have not yet recognized the nature of our minds, 
so he gave his instructions as a way for us to come to know it. In this 
way he discovered the wish-fulfilling jewel of the mind. This is the 
sense in which Khenpo Gangshar was a terton: he gave instructions 
on the nature of the mind. 
KHENPO GANSHAR'S VISIT TO 
THRANGU MONASTERY 
Khenpo Ganshar first gave these instructions at Surmang Monastery 
in the summer of 1957. Then he sent an elderly monk from Surmang 
named Karma Ngodrup to go around in advance and give themes­
sage to people that Khenpo Gangshar would be giving his teachings 
everywhere and that everyone should come-these were important 
and timely teachings. 
A few days later, Khenpo Gangshar came to our monastery and 
gave his teachings. He went to teach everywhere- he went up to the 
retreat center, down to the shedra, to the main monastery, and down 
to the town. He taught the Dharma and gave his instructions to every­
one he met. He told them that they must practice the Dharma well 
and that even though there was a great danger from the Chinese, they 
must not fight. It was wrong to kill, he said. Instead they should take 
control of their minds. Khenpo Gangshar first taught these instruc­
tions orally, and then he composed the very short and pithy set of 
instructions titled "The Concise Mind Instructions Called Naturally 
Liberating Whatever You Meet" while staying at the retreat center at 
Thrangu Monastery. Later he expanded these instructions into the 
somewhat longer text titled "Naturally Liberating Whatever You 
Meet." The instructions in that text are essentially the instructions 
that he taught while staying at Thrangu Monastery. These instruc­
tions are short but carry exceptional blessings and power. Not only 
14 
PROP}JECIES OF HIDDEN LANDS 
are they beneficial, they are also easy to practice. They are concise yet. 
profound and can truly help us. In them, Khenpo Gangshar reveals 
the jewel of the nature of the mind that is already present within us. 
Khenpo Gangshar gave his instructions in many different ways, in­
cluding through poetry and metaphor. There was a monk at Thrangu 
Monastery who was in retreat and asked Khenpo Gangshar for some 
advice. Khenpo Gangshar replied with a poem, which said that sit­
ting on the peak of a rocky mountain was a vulture. Sometimes the 
vulture soared up high in the sky, and sometimes it floated down to 
the ground. In the end, though, the vulture just dies. "Do you under­
stand this instruction?" asked Khenpo Gangshar. 
This particular monk had studied quite a lot. "Yes, I do," he replied. 
"The rocky mountain is our pride. On the pinnacle of this mountain, 
the vulture represents great intelligence. This is like a high view-the 
view of realizing emptiness and forceful reasoning. Sometimes the 
view soars like a vulture higher and higher, and sometimes it comes 
down to the ground. But if you don't actually practice the Dharma, 
one day the vulture will just die. Flying around high in the sky does 
not help much if one day you are just going to die anyway." This is 
how Khenpo Gangshar taught the importance of meditation prac­
tice. Sometimes we have a high view but do not practice much. This 
is what the vulture represents: sometimes we spout high views with 
our mouths, saying lofty and difficult words such as "There is no self" 
or "Emptiness," words that soar ever higher and higher. But after the 
vulture soars up and up and up, it eventually comes down to the 
earth, and after it lands, what does it do? Being a vulture, it eats car­
rion, whether a horse's corpse, a human corpse, or the corpse of some 
other animal. Eventually, it will die in some miserable fashion. Simi­
larly, having high views will not help us much in the end. What really 
helps us is practice. 
If all we do is think about it conceptually, then it is perhaps a bit 
difficult to see the essence of the mind as it is. But if you have strong 
faith and devotion as well as renunciation and weariness with the 
world, then it is possible for you to realize the nature of mind. If your 
faith and devotion are not all that strong, then even if you put a lot of 
effort into it, it will be somewhat difficult. This is why it is important 
HELPFUL ADVICE FOR GOOD TIMES AND BAD 
to reflect upon how fortunate we are to have a precious human body 
and how fortunate it is to have entered the gate of the Dharma. It is 
extremely important to study and contemplate this, to generate faith 
and devotion, and develop our wonderful ability. 
The Buddha taught eighty-four thousand differe~lt types of Dharma. 
What is the root of all of all the eight-four thousand different Dharma 
teachings? In the terms of the foundation vehicle, it all comes down 
to the selflessness of the individual. Because we cling strongly to a self, 
the afflictions arise. Because of these afflictions, we then experience 
many different types of suffering. In order to free ourselves of that 
suffering, we need to get rid of the afflictions. In order to abandon 
the afflictions, we need to realize the selflessness of the individual. 
For that reason, the foundation vehicle teaches meditation on the 
selflessness of the individual. 
The great vehicle teaches not just the selflessness of the individual, 
but also the selflessness of all phenomena, The great works of middle­
way philosophy use logic to teach that all phenomena are empty. 
They teach the sixteen different types of emptiness and so forth to 
show us how to discard the strong fixations we have. In order to dis­
card our fixations, we need to realize the way things truly are. In order 
to realize that, we need to develop certainty through logical analysis, 
which can then bring us to a realization of emptiness. 
When we do the practices of the secret mantra vajrayana, we do 
not just strive to realize the selflessness of the individual, nor do we 
merely try to come to an understanding of the emptiness of all phe­
nomena. We do try to understand these, but we do not use these prac­
tices as the basis of our meditation. So what do practitioners of the 
secret mantra do? Primarily, we do the practices of mahamudra and 
dzogchen. In these practices we do not look out at external phenom­
ena, but look inside to get to the bottom of the way our mind is so 
that we can realize the nature of our mind. We see that it is empty; 
we examine the way the mind actually is. When we see the nature of 
our mind, we can pacify all of our excessive clinging and our strong 
feelings. These practices are a wonderful way to tame our fixation. 
Whether we are practicing mahamudra or dzogchen, the funda­
mental method is to look at the nature of our mind and realize it, 
16 
PROPHECIES OF HIDDEN LANDS 
naked, just as it is. This is the technique that Khenpo Gangshar's in­
structions teach. These methods and instructions are very important 
to consider, both in the ultimate terms of Dharma and in the tempo­
rary terms of this world. The reason is that they can help us in both 
good times and bad. 
There are some people who are happy and do not have any prob­
lems. Everything goes as it should and they are happy, healthy, and 
joyful. But what happens to us when we become happy, healthy, 
and joyful? Often our thinking gets confused. As it is said, exter­
nal phenomena are too bright, and our internal mind is not bright 
enough. As a result of this, we forget to think about our ultimate 
purposes and forget to practice the Dharma. But we must not forget 
to practice. We need to be able to practice meditating on the nature 
of mind, and if we do so, our practice will go well. This is why it is 
important to practice the Dharma when things go well. 
Sometimes people encounter many problems in their lives~ There 
are many obstacles, things go wrong and they feel like they cannot get 
anything done-everything goes badly. When that happens, we are 
often overwhelmed by suffering and feel sorry for ourselves, thinking 
"I'm having a hard time." But there is no point to doing that. Other 
people have difficulties with strong negative emotions and afflictions 
that occur. We should not be surprised and dumbfounded if there are 
some problems in our lives. Our practice can help us in such times: if 
we meditate on these instructions, it will help us, so that we will not 
feel such suffering. 
Whether we are happy or unhappy, it is important that we contem­
plate the nature of our minds. If we can practice in this way, it will be 
like the saying on mind training: 
In happy times, it bows our neck; 
When bad times come, it is a friend. 
When things are good, meditating on the nature of the mind will 
prevent us &om playing too many games. When times are bad, we 
won't wallow in despair and depression. If we meditate on the nature 
of our mind, we will not have such a hard time and things will go 
well; this is extremely helpful. 
I7 
HELPFUL ADVICE FOR GOOD TIMES AND BAD 
Khenpo Gangshar was a lama unlike any other. I did not know 
much about him before he came to Thrangu Monastery. When he 
was about to arrive, many people said that he had the best instruc­
tions and strongest and most powerful blessings, and when I heard 
that, I thought I was going to receive those blessings, too. But when 
he came, I did not feel anything special on the first day. I did not feel 
anything on the second day. I was disappointed, but people had said 
that you get his blessings through his mind instructions, so I decided 
to ask for them. When he gave me the instructions, at first I did not 
feel anything. But a few days later, while I was eating my supper, I 
had this feeling and suddenly realized, "This is what the lama was 
talking about! This is what he meant!" I experienced a feeling unlike 
any other I had ever felt, and that is when I realized what an extra­
ordinary lama he was and how powerful his teachings were. That is 
how it happened. 
After giving his instructions at Thrangu Monastery, Khenpo Gang­
shar left, accompanied by Trungpa Rinpoche. They headed toward 
Shechen Monastery, but Trungpa Rinpoche was turned back at the 
border between the districts of Qinghai and Sechuan by the Chi­
nese, and Khenpo Gangshar continued on his own. I heard that later 
nothing particularly bad happened to him. He passed away peace­
fully after an illness; he did not die in a Chinese prison. This is what 
I heard, but I never met anyone who could confirm this. 
18 
2 
RECOGNIZING OUR 
GOOD FORTUNE 
THE TITLE OF THESE INSTRUCTIONS is "Naturally Liberating 
Whatever You Meet: Instructions to Guide You on the Profound 
Path." These instructions are intended to guide us down a profound 
and helpful path. They are instructions that we need to encounter 
and when we do, we receive their great blessings and power. Because 
of that, everything that we meet can be naturally liberated. This is 
why they are called "Naturally Liberating Whatever You Meet." 
There are many wonderful instructions in Tibetan Buddhism, in­
cluding the mahamudra instructions of the Kagyu tradition and the 
dzogchen instructions of the Nyingma tradition. But Khenpo Gang­
shar's text does not give a complete presentation of the instructions 
on mahamudra, nor does it give a complete presentation of the in­
structions on dzogchen. Instead, Khenpo Gangshar presents the most 
fundamental instructions of both mahamudra and dzogchen. He 
uses mahamudra terminology such as "ordinary mind" and dzogchen 
terminology such as "differentiating mind and awareness." Thus this 
text is a summary of all the mind instructions of mahamudra and 
dzogchen. It is especially connected with the Kagyu lineage because 
Khenpo Gangsharwas a student ofShechen Kongtrul Rinpoche, who 
was a student of the Shechen Gyaltsap Gyurme Perna Namgyel. The 
Shechen Gyaltsap was himself a principle disciple of Jamgon Kong­
trul Lodro Thaye, a master of the Kagyu lineage. 
19 
HELPFUL ADVICE FOR GOOD TIMES AND BAD 
Khenpo Gangshar begins these instructions by paying homage so 
that they can be helpful for many people. The text reads: 
With the devotion of self-knowing I pay homage to Guru 
Vajradhara. 
The homage, or prostration, is to Guru Vajradhara. The fact that we 
are able to meet someone who can give these instructions and our 
great fortune to be able to receive them depend upon Vajradhara­
they depend upon the nature of the mind. This is something that we 
can meditate upon if we want. If we want instructions on it, we can 
receive them. That is why we pay homage to the Guru Vajradhara. 
In general, there are said to be four different kinds of gurus. The 
first is the individual guru of the lineage. Individual gurus of the lin­
eage are all the lamas who have appeared one after another in the 
lineage. The second type of guru is the word guru of the sugatas. This 
means the speech of the Buddha and the instructions of all the great 
adepts. We can read these in books and c6me to understand them so 
that we can develop some experience of what they teach. The third 
type of guru is the sign guru of appearances. When we meditate, we 
gain some experience through our practice, and as we continue, we 
see various appearances. These are the sign guru of appearances: as 
we see them through the experience of our practice, our experience 
grows clearer and clearer. The fourth type of guru is the ultimate 
guru of the dharma nature. This means that as we do our meditation 
practice, there is something we can meditate on, something we can 
come to realize and experience. There is a result to attain through 
practice. All appearances arise out of the nature of our minds, and 
there is something in the nature of the mind to recognize. That is 
called the ultimate guru of the dharma nature. Of these four differ­
ent gurus, here we are prostrating to the fourth, the ultimate guru of 
the dharma nature. We can meditate, and by doing that we will grad­
ually develop experience and exceptional realization. This is called 
Guru Vajradhara, the dharmakaya Vajradhara who is within the ulti­
mate nature. 
Many of us have seen pictures of Vajradhara, and we think of him 
as being blue in color, with two hands and holding a bell and a vajra. 
20 
RECOGNIZING OUR GOOD FORTUNE 
That form is the enjoyment body of Vajradhara. The Vajradhara we 
prostrate to here, however, cannot be found to have any form. Vajra 
means unchanging-the unchanging dharma expanse or nature of 
phenomena. The ultimate nature is something that we can experi­
ence and practice. There is something we can realize, and as we prac­
tice we can attain to the ultimate results of the practice. That is why 
we prostrate to it. 
The manner in which we prostrate is with the devotion of self. 
awareness. Here what is important is that we are paying homage with 
our own self-awareness and with the devotion present in our mind. 
Normally when we think of prostrations, we think of what we do 
with our body: first joining our palms and then bending down, put­
ting our hands, knees, and head on the ground. We think of this physi­
cal action as being a prostration, but that is not what is meant here. 
What is really meant here is that we feel faith and excitement in our 
minds about the ultimate guru of the dharma nature. We think, "I can 
experience this. I'm going to meditate and practice. By doing so, I am 
going to realize what there is to realize." We prostrate mentally with 
respect, faith, and belief in both the Dharma and these instructions. 
The Tibetan word for prostration is chhaktsal. The first syllable, 
chhak, means to sweep or clean-to clean up all the dust. Meditating 
is a bit like cleaning: we want to find the nature of our mind, but it is 
hidden by all our coarse afflictions and bad thoughts. The meaning 
of the syllable chhak is that we are sweeping away those obscurations. 
The second syllable, tsal, means to request something. It is like say­
ing, "I am going to meditate, and through doing the practice I would 
like to realize the nature of the mind." This is a prayer to realize the 
nature of the mind. 
WoRTHINESS AND GooD FoRTUNE 
After the prostration, Khenpo Gangshar begins the instructions with 
a description of a worthy or fortunate student: 
A worthy student is one who aspires to practice the pro­
foundest of the profound and secret vajrayana-the 
21 
HELPFUL ADVICE FOR GOOD TIMES AND BAD 
essential oral instructions of all the anuttara yoga tantras or 
the nature of the realization of effortless ati. 
The Buddha gave several different types of teachings because he 
taught the Dharma that was right for each individual student and 
met their needs. There are in general three different types of teach­
ings: the vehicle for listeners, the vehicle for bodhisattvas, and the 
vehicle of the secret mantra vajrayana. Of these three vehicles, the 
instructions here come from the secret mantra vajrayana because 
that is the vehicle that is easiest to practice and brings the greatest 
benefit. 
In the secret mantra vajrayana, there are four different classes of 
tantras: action tantra, conduct tantra, yoga tantra, and unexcelled 
(anuttara) yoga tantra. Dharma practitioners in Tibet do some prac­
tices from the action tantra and the yoga tantra, but they primar­
ily practice the fourth class, the unexcelh;d yoga tantra. Khenpo 
Gangshar's instructions present the main or essential instructions­
the most important points or the essence of the unexcelled yoga. 
There are many different practices within the unexcelled yoga tan­
tea, which can be summed up as practices that involve effort and those 
that do not involve effort. Those that involve effort are such practices 
as the six yogas ofNaropa within the tradition of mahamudra. These 
are the meditations on tummo, transference of consciousness, illu­
sory body, and so forth. Within the dzogchen tradition, there are the 
instructions on thogal, which sometimes involve practicing in dark­
ness and sometimes practicing in sunlight, and so forth. All of these 
practices involve effort. 
The oral instructions of the unexcelled yoga tantra also include 
effortless practices that are easy to do. In the mahamudra tradi­
tion, these are taken from the nondual tantras, which are the last 
of the three sections of the unexcelled yoga tantra. In the context 
of dzogchen, the effortless instructions are called ati yoga, or the ef­
fortless ati. This means dzogchen, the great perfection. The Third 
Karmapa Rangjung Dorje described the great perfection in his "Aspi­
ration Prayer of Mahamudra": 
22 
RECOGNIZING OUR GOOD FORTUNE 
This freedom from mental engagement is mahamudra. 
Beyond extremes, it is the great middle way. 
As this includes everything, it is also called the great 
perfection. 
May we gain the confidence that to know one is to realize 
the meaning of all. 
What this means is that when we are practicing without any particu­
lar mental engagement-when we are not strictly paying attention 
to something-and we are looking at the nature of the mind, that is 
mahamudra. We can call it by other names as well. Since it is free of 
all the extremes of permanence or nihilism, it is in the middle, so it 
is also called the great middle way. Because it is the perfection of all 
meanings, it is the great perfection, or dzogchen. The aspiration is 
that we may have the confidence that by knowing one, the nature of 
the mind, we may know all: mahamudra is just this; great perfection 
is just this; the great middle way is just this. This is what is called here 
the effortless ati of the great perfection. 
When the great meditation masters of Tibet teach these instruc­
tions, they call them "mind instructions." If we say "dzogchen," we 
mean mind instructions. If we say "mahamudra," we mean mind in­
structions. What we mean by mind instructions is that we don't really 
analyze external appearances. We instead look directly at the nature 
of our internal mind itsel£ When we see that, the emptiness of all 
phenomena is just that. The clear knowing aspect is just that. We are 
able to recognize this, and so that is what we mean by mind instruc­
tions: meditating on our minds. 
Because mind instructions are effortless, they are easy to prac­
tice and fit into any lifestyle, as the examples of the eighty-four 
mahasiddhas of India show. Some of the mahasiddhas were great 
scholars and did this practice simultaneously with their intellec­
tual work. Others were not so well educated but were still able to 
do this practice. Some were very wealthy and had a lot of posses­
sions, yet were still able to do this practice. Still others led simple, 
uncomplicated lives with few possessions and were also able to do 
23 
HELPFUL ADVICE FOR GOOD TIMES AND BAD 
this practice. This is because these instructions are effortless, easy, 
and uncomplicated. These instructions are intended for people who 
want to enter the gate into the practice of mahamudra and dzogchen, 
for people who think to themselves, "I want and need to do this 
practice." 
Khenpo Gangshar says his instructions are meant for worthy or 
fortunate students. This is very important: you are a fortunate and 
worthy student-you are extraordinary in this regard. Even if the 
Dharma spreads throughout the world and is preserved, if you are 
not fortunate, you will not be able to practice them. For example, in 
Asia the Dharma is close and conditions are good. All you need to 
practice Dharma is here: there are places to study the Dharma and 
practice the Dharma. There are many opportunities. Yet even so, many 
people do not have the fortune to take advantage of this. Dharma is 
close, available, and important for them to practice, but they are not 
inclined to practice and their minds are distracted by worldly affairs 
when they should be looking up toward the Dharma. Such people 
are not fortunate. 
In contrast, many Westerners will travel long distances, crossing 
great oceans just to study and practice the Dharma. Even those who 
stay in their own country often now have the interest and ability to 
practice. You are very fortunate to be able to encounter the Dharma 
at this particular time and to have the wish to practice it. For ex­
ample, if you had been born seventy years earlier, you would not 
have had the opportunity to encounter the Dharma because at that 
time it was almost impossible to even hear of the Dharma, let alone 
encounter it. Even those Westerners who encountered the Dharma 
at that time often did not have the wish to practice it. For example, 
there was an Englishman named Francis Younghusband who went 
to Lhasa in 1904. Of course the Dharma flourished in Lhasa, but his 
motivation did not intersect with the Dharma. He thought of the 
Dharma as stupid and was more interested in politics and power. 
Maybe he thought of Tibetans as ignorant and thought more of poli­
tics. Perhaps he had a better motivation and thought that he would 
need to help the poor Tibetans by teaching them his own modern, 
24 
RECOGNIZING OUR GOOD FORTUNE 
sensible ways, but in any case his motivation prevented him from 
actually encountering the Dharma. He was powerful and influential, 
but he did not have the fortune to practice the Dharma. 
When I first traveled to the West, there were people who had some 
faith in the Dharma, but they often had doubts about some things. 
Most people wanted to hear certain types of Dharma teachings, but 
often they were not interested in receiving empowerments or did 
not know that they should take empowerments. They believed some 
Dharma teachings but doubted others. Nowadays as the Dharma 
spreads and becomes popular in the West, people are developing a 
stronger belief in the Dharma. Some people even have complete faith 
in the Dharma, which is excellent. 
But even though the Dharma has spread to many lands, not every­
one is able to enter the gate of the Dharma and practice it. Not 
everyone is able to believe the Dharma. Even many who have started 
to learn about the Dharma and begun to believe it are unable to 
practice it. But you are not like that: you have fortune to be able 
to practice the Dharma. Over the course of many aeons, you have 
gathered a tremendous amount of merit, because of which you now 
have had the good fortune to be born in a precious human body, en­
counter the Dharma, and recognize how valuable it is. You have seen 
how the Dharma will be beneficial for your life and have developed 
faith in it. Not only do you have faith, but you actually have the wish 
to practice the Dharma. Such an intention is actually very difficult to 
come by. This is a wonderful, great fortune, and this is what it means 
to be a worthy student. Now that you have this good fortune, it is 
important that you be diligent in your Dharma practice. 
jOY AND EXCITEMENT FOR OuR PRACTICE 
It is important to realize how fortunate we are. Sometimes we for­
get and think to ourselves, "Well, I've started practicing Dharma but 
I haven't had any signs of experience or realization." We might get 
depressed or discouraged about it, but there is really no need for 
that. We have entered the gate of the Dharma and are what is here 
25 
HELPFUL ADVICE FOR GOOD TIMES AND BAD 
called a worthy student. We should recognize this for the good for­
tune that it is. We should remember that practicing the Dharma is 
good and beneficial, and reflect on how lucky we are to be able to 
practice it. 
When we are receiving instructions, it is important that we have 
faith and devotion, and the most important thing for that is to be re­
ally excited. We need to realize how fortunate we are to be able to do 
this. If we really see how fortunate we are, this will be really wonder­
ful and extremely beneficial for us. But if we have this great fortune 
and instead of recognizing it we think it is something ordinary, we 
will not be able to extract much power out of the instructions. This is 
why the great teacher Shantideva said: 
Those who thus with clear intelligence 
Take hold of the awakened mind with clear and lucid joy, 
That they may now increase what they have gained 
Should lift their hearts with praises such as these. 
We need to be joyful and excited, because if we feel enthusiasm for 
our practice, we will be more and more diligent. Then our practice 
will just get better and better. On the other hand, if we are not excited 
about our practice and do not have any joy for it, it will not really 
go anywhere. Similarly, in order to confess and get rid of our wrong­
doings, nonvirtues, and negativities, we should regret them and think, 
"Oh, that was not so good." If we do that, they will naturally decrease. 
Otherwise, if we think, "That was great!" they will grow stronger and 
stronger. Therefore we should always be excited and happy about our 
Dharma practice and regret our misdeeds and nonvirtues. 
Sometimes we set the foundation for our Dharma practice by 
generating weariness with the world. We think about the imperma­
nence of all phenomena. We think about suffering. By doing that, we 
develop world-weariness, and from that we recognize that we really 
need to practice the Dharma. Out of that recognition, we begin to 
actually practice the Dharma. Sometimes when we practice, we do 
not worry about developing world-weariness. Instead, we have joy 
and excitement. We think about how fortunate we are to be able 
26 
RECOGNIZING OUR GOOD FORTUNE 
to practice. Now that we have this good fortune, it is important to 
practice. These are two different methods of inspiring ourselves to 
practice, one through world-weariness and the other through joy and 
excitement. The method we should use now is to generate joy and 
excitement. 
This is not merely a question of fe_eling joy and excitement within 
our minds. We need to contemplate how extremely fortunate we are 
to be able to practice the Dharma in this world now. The Dharma 
of the great vehicle has spread. The Dharma of the Theravada tradi­
tion has also spread. The Dharma of the secret mantra vajrayana has 
spread. These three different types of Dharma have all appeared in 
this world. Since I am someone who practices the secret mantra, it is 
a bit uncomfortable to say that the vajrayana is the best of these three 
types of Dharma, but this is in fact the case. It is important to know 
what is right and true. We have this great fortune: the secret mantra 
vajrayana flourished in Tibet and then spread beyond. Now we have 
all the favorable conditions we need to practice the Dharma. The 
instructions are here, and we have the opportunity to practice the 
best Dharma. 
When the Buddha appeared in India, he taught the Dharma and 
had many followers-arhats and mahasiddhas-who preserved 
and protected the Dharma. They practiced the Dharma and passed 
on the oral instructions for their practices. All of these instructions 
were preserved in their entirety in Tibet. But they were not just pre­
served as mere words or intellectual knowledge; the great masters 
practiced these instructions and many of them achieved realization 
through the instructions. All of these instructions have been pre­
served in Tibet without deteriorating or being lost. In terms of ex­
ternal circumstances, there have been some difficulties, but in terms 
of the internal practice, the essence of all the spiritual instructions 
that were given and preserved in India and then spread to Tibet has 
not encountered any obstacles. These instructions have been main­
tained in an unbroken continuum in Tibet. We are very fortunate 
that the Dharma that the Buddha taught has not been lost but has 
been preserved. 
27 
HELPFUL ADVICE FOR GOOD TIMES AND BAD 
In the ninth century, there was a Tibetan king named Langdarma 
who tried to eradicate the Dharma in Tibet. He destroyed many tem­
ples and tried to stamp out the Dharma, but he did not succeed. The 
lineages of the Dharma and the instructions were preserved through 
that period. If we look at recent history, there was the Cultural Revo­
lution in Tibet. But even during the Cultural Revolution, the Dharma 
did not disappear. They ·destroyed temples, tore down statues, and 
burned sacred texts, but the lineage of the Dharma was not lost. That 
lineage of the Dharma still exists and you as a Dharma practitioner 
have the great fortune to read these teachings. You have the oppor­
tunity to practice and should remember this great fortune. 
The great teacher Patrul Rinpoche told a story that illustrates how 
we should practice. Once there was a blind man who was stranded 
alone in the middle of a vast plain. He did not know where he was. 
He did not have any helpers. He could not tell which direction was 
east or west; there was no way he could go anywhere for help. Since 
he was blind, there was no way for him to know where to go. While 
he was wondering what he would do, he heard the sound of a cow 
grazing, munching on grass, and had a brilliant idea: "I can grab 
the cow's tail and follow that cow home, and there will be someone 
there to help me." He listened to the sound of the cow masticating, 
stumbled over to it, and grabbed its tail. He hung on as tight as he 
could and would not let go, following the cow wherever it went as 
it wandered across the plain. Finally, it returned to its owner's house, 
and the blind man found someone who could help him out of his 
situation. 
In a sense, we are in a similar situation, stuck in samsara, but we 
have now found the path of the Dharma. Just like the blind man 
who hung on to that cow's tail for dear life, we need to hold on to 
the Dharma as tight as we can. If we do so and continue to practice, 
we will be able to achieve the ultimate result of this effort. Perhaps 
it is not such a good idea for me to compare you to a blind man being 
dragged hither and thither by a cow, but now that you have this good 
fortune to find the Dharma, you should hang on to it tight. Practice 
the Dharma, and you will reach the highest results. 
2.8 
RECOGNIZING OUR GOOD FORTUNE 
Now we have encountered a really profound instruction. Not only 
is it a very special instruction, it is one we can actually practice. We 
also have the wish and intention to practice it. We have an oppor­
tunity to study it. What a wonderful great fortune this is! If we realize 
what a great fortune we have and we are joyous and excited about it, 
it will eventually bring us to a wonderful result. So for that reason I 
ask you to please be as excited and joyous about this as you can. 
3 
THE GENERAL 
PRELIMINARIES 
THESE INSTRUCTIONS have three different parts. The first is the 
preliminary steps of mind training. We all have minds, and the na­
ture of our minds is naturally completely pure and excellent. But we 
have come under the power of confused relative appearances, so we 
need to train, purify, and cleanse our mind. The process of cleansing 
and training our minds is the preliminary practice. 
The second step is the main practice of pointing out. We need to 
have the nature of mind pointed out to us, and we need to recognize 
it, as will be described below. 
The third instruction is the subsequent application, combining the 
profound advice into key points. What do we need to do after we 
have recognized the nature of mind? We need to take these instruc­
tions as the path, and apply them. When we encounter suffering, we 
need to be able to get rid of our suffering. When we experience fear, 
we need to be able to get rid of our fear. When we experience attach­
ment, clinging, and the afflictions, or when we experience torpor and 
agitation, we need to be able to get rid of them. We can use these 
instructions to deal with these and take them as the path. This is 
the subsequent application that combines the profound advice into 
key points. 
There are many different types of Dharma instructions and prac­
tices. For the listeners, practitioners of the foundation vehicle, the 
THE GENERAL PRELIMINARIES 
main practice is to give up nonvirtue and maintain good behavior, 
through which they come to achieve a good result. The great vehicle 
includes practices of relative and ultimate bodhichitta. The main 
practices of relative bodhichitta are to give up our bad habits of mind 
and replace them with good thought patterns such as the wish to 
help all beings. The main practice of ultimate bodhichitta is to try 
to realize the meaning of the emptiness of all phenomena. 
But in the secret mantra vajrayana, the main practice rests upon the 
fact that all our pleasures, suffering, confusion, and qualities come 
down to our mind, and so we need to understand what the essence 
of the mind is. We put particular emphasis on the mind because if 
we realize its nature, it will be as if everything else is transformed as 
well. If we can really get to the bottom of the mind, we can take con­
trol over everything. The three sections of these instructions are all 
methods to apply this focus to the mind. 
The preliminary steps of mind training are divided into two sec­
tions: the general preliminaries and the special preliminaries, which 
represent the unique qualities of this particular path. Although it 
does not say so in the text, the first of these also has two parts: the 
common preliminaries of the four thoughts that turn the mind and 
the uncommon preliminaries of going for refuge, arousing bodhi­
chitta, and so forth. The first part, the common preliminaries, is 
not explicitly taught in the text, but it is very important for these 
instructions. 
THE CoMMON PRELIMINARIES 
People often say to me that they like the Dharma in general. They 
have faith in the Dharma; they believe in it, but sometimes they are 
unable to practice. They ask me what the best thing to do in this 
situation is. We need to realize that practice is something we can­
not do without. We need to think about the reasons why Dharma 
is indispensable. If we think about the reasons, faith will come, and 
then we will naturally become diligent in our practice. This is why 
we contemplate the nature of things and the four thoughts that turn 
the mind. 
31 
HELPFUL ADVICE FOR GOOD TIMES AND BAD 
The First Thought 
The first thought that turns the mind is the contemplation of the 
precious human body, so difficult to find. We are very fortunate to 
have this precious human body and we should not let it go to waste. 
It is very important to realize this. But it is not just that we have a 
human body-we are also extremely fortunate to have encountered 
these instructions. Khe~po Gangshar was a great meditator from 
a remote and isolated region of Tibet. He gave these instructions 
in that area, and if you think about it, it is next to impossible that 
you could have encountered them. He taught them in a place very 
far away, and eventually they were translated into English so that 
now you can read them. But just having the possibility of reading 
the instructions is not in and of itself a good fortune. You might 
have thought, "It's just a book by some crazy lama from Tibet. Why 
should I pay any attention to it? What good is practicing this going 
to do? I'm from America! I'm really smart! I don't need this crazy 
Tibetan guy's instructions at all." Although you could have thought 
that, you did not. Instead you thought, "These are important. If 
I study them and put them into practice, they will help me." You 
have some faith in them. Thus these instructions were taught in 
an isolated region of Tibet, gradually spread, and were translated 
into English. Then you came across them and developed faith and 
interest in them. What an incredible good fortune! This good for­
tune to encounter the Dharma and these particular instructions 
is the precious human birth, so difficult to find. We have encoun­
tered the Dharma, which is so hard to find. When we encounter 
the Dharma, we need to be able to have faith and devotion, and 
we have been able to do that. Now that we have such good for­
tune, we must not let it go to waste-we need to practice in this 
human life. 
The Second Thought 
The second thought that turns the mind is the contemplation of 
death and impermanence. Sometimes we think of this as being de-
32 
THE GENERAL PRELIMINARIES 
pressing. It is an unhappy and unpleasant topic. But this weariness 
does not hurt us in any way-it helps us. As the Buddha said, "At 
first it is the condition that encourages us toward the Dharma. In 
the middle, it is the rod that spurs us on to diligence. In the end, it is 
the companion of the result." 
When we say that it is a condition that encourages toward the 
Dharma, this means that at first, when we haven't thought about im­
permanence, during happy times we get distracted by our pleasure. 
But our happiness always changes in the end. Its nature is imperma­
nent. If we do not know this and get distracted, in the future, when 
it changes, it will be as if there is nothing we can do and we will be 
badly off. If we start thinking about impermanence now, we can pre­
pare ourselves well. This will encourage us to practice the Dharma; 
we will think, "I must practice." We will not forget the Dharma. 
Once we are motivated to practice the Dharma, how does contem­
plating impermanence help? In the middle, it is the rod that spurs 
us on to diligence. Sometimes we might start feeling a bit lazy, but if 
we have contemplated impermanence we will feel as if we can't let 
ourselves be lazy. We will think that we need to be diligent. 
In the end, meditating on impermanence is the companion for 
attaining the result. What this means is that first it encourages us to 
practice the Dharma, then it encourages us to be diligent, and in the 
end we achieve a wonderful result. As Milarepa said, 
First I went to the mountains out of fear of death, 
But now I've seized the stronghold of deathlessness. 
In the beginning, Milarepa went to the mountains and meditated 
out of a fear of death. As a result of that, he reached a state beyond 
the fear of death. If we practice in the same way as Milarepa, this can 
happen for us as well, but even if we cannot accomplish as much as 
Milarepa did, we can feel as if we have done something. This gives us 
confidence. If all we do is recite a hundred O¥ MA~I PADME HU¥ 
mantras with a kind heart and good motivation, at least we can think, 
"On that day I really recited those manis well." We will be pleased 
with what we have done. Even if a virtuous act is small, it will not go 
to waste and will be very helpful. 
33 
HELPFUL ADVICE FOR GOOD TIMES AND BAD 
The Third Thought 
The third thought that turns the mind is the contemplation of karma. 
We often think that karma means we do not have any control, but it 
is not really like that. Actually, karma gives us control. We all want 
to be happy, but we wonder whether that is possible. It is possible: 
if we perform the cause of happiness-virtuous actions-we will 
experience the happiness that results from them. Similarly, we do 
not want to suffer. Can we get rid of suffering? Yes, we can, because 
the cause of suffering is misdeeds and nonvirtue. If we give those 
up, we will gain freedom from suffering. Therefore if we properly 
take up virtue and give up wrongdoing, we can be happy and free of 
suffering. 
The Fourth Thought 
The fourth thought that turns the mind is meditation on the defects 
of samsara. We humans experience the suffering of birth, aging, sick­
ness, and death. We encounter difficulties and obstacles. Ordinary 
people think that they are just having hard luck and that only they 
are having these problems, but that is not how it is. Birth, aging, sick­
ness, death, and all kinds of problems are characteristics of samsara. 
Everyone experiences them. This is why we need to practice Dharma. 
By practicing Dharma, we can abandon the afflictions. By abandon­
ing the afflictions, we can give up misdeeds and nonvirtue, which 
will bring us freedom from suffering. To free ourselves from samsara, 
we need to practice the genuine Dharma, and to do that we primarily 
need to practice meditation. This is why we meditate on the defects 
of samsara. 
Thus the general preliminaries are to contemplate the four 
thoughts that turn the mind: the precious human body; imperma­
nence; karma, cause and effect; and the defects of samsara. If we un­
derstand them and their reasons thoroughly, we will naturally enter 
the Dharma and be diligent about it. These common preliminaries 
allow us to enter the Dharma even if we had been unable to before. 
34 
THE GENERAL PRELIMINARIES 
THE UNCOMMON PRELIMINARIES 
Next, the text explicitly describes the four uncommon preliminary 
practices. The first of these is refuge and bodhichitta: 
Taking refuge, which is the difference between this path 
and an incorrect path. Arousing bodhichitta, which raises 
you above the inferior paths. 
In general, the wish to enter the gate of the Dharma is really quite 
rare. But even if we develop such a wish, there is a danger that we will 
follow a wrong path. We might not even know that it is the wrong 
path. How can we avoid the wrong path? We need to take refuge in 
the Three Jewels of the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha. We take refuge 
in the Buddha Shakyamuni as the teacher. The path we need to fol­
low is the Dharma that he taught, and our companions as we practice 
this path are the Sangha. In the secret mantra vajrayana, we also go 
for refuge in the root of blessings, the guru; the root of accomplish­
ment, the yidam deities; and the root of activity, the Dharma protec­
tors. Although in general we go for refuge in the Buddha, Dharma, 
and Sangha, the one from whom we receive the power and blessings 
of the Buddha is our root guru, which is why the guru is called the 
root of blessings. We also need to accomplish the Dharma, and we 
do this primarily through the creation and completion-stage prac­
tices of a yidam deity, which is why yid~m deities are called the root 
of accomplishment. We take refuge in the Sangha in general, but 
some members of the Sangha take a human form while others do 
not. Those who appear in a nonhuman form are great bodhisattvas 
manifesting as Dharma protectors, so we make offerings to them and 
invoke them to perform various types of activities. This is how we go 
for refuge in the three roots. When we do the practice of going for 
refuge in the Three Jewels and the three roots, we recite the prayer of 
going for refuge, and also prostrate a hundred thousand times. This 
is the practice of taking refuge, which marks the difference between 
this path and the incorrect path. 
We need to practice and accomplish the Dharma. Normally, our 
35 
HELPFUL ADVICE FOR GOOD TIMES AND BAD 
-------- -----------------------------------------
motivation for doing this is to help ourselves or, if we have a slightly 
larger motivation, to help a few other people. The motivation to truly 
help other people is extremely rare, and the motivation to bring ben­
efit to all sentient beings almost never happens, but it is extremely 
important. Whether we are doing Dharma or worldly work, thinking 
only of our own benefit may be a good motivation, but it is very lim­
ited and narrow. Similarly, if our motivation is to benefit a select few 
other people, that too is a good motivation, but it is also limited. The 
moti~ation that we really need is broader and more spacious-the 
wish to bring benefit to all sentient beings. All sentient beings want to 
be happy; all sentient beings want to be free of suffering, and therefore 
we need to bring them to happiness and free them from suffering. The 
power to be able to do this comes from practicing the Dharma. That 
is why we study and practice the Dharma-so that we can attain the 
ultimate result and be able to help all sentient beings in the future. 
It is important for us to develop this vast intention ofbodhichitta. If 
we have a limited motivation, the results that we achieve will also be 
limited. But if we have a vast motivation, the results that we attain will 
be vast. That is why when we embark upon the path, it is important to 
develop the bodhichitta that raises you above the inferior path. 
Vajrasattva 
The second of the preliminaries is: 
The meditation and recitation of Vajrasattva, which puri­
fies misdeeds, obscurations, and adverse conditions that 
prevent the essence of refuge and bodhichitta from dawn­
ing in your being. 
Why do we do Vajrasattva meditation? We often have many problems 
that prevent us from developing relative and ultimate bodhichitta, 
the meditation that realizes the nature of the mind. What are these 
problems? Often they are the obstacles from bad acts that we have 
committed in previous lives. These are what we call misdeeds. We 
also often have strong imprints from the past that lead us to have 
strong afflictions and coarse thoughts. These are what we call obscu-
THE GENERAL PRELIMINARIES 
rations. Often we have thoughts of greed, aversion, delusion, pride, 
or jealousy. These are what we call the afflictive obscurations. Some­
times, we might not experience greed, aversion, jealousy, or another 
affliction, but we have many thoughts that prevent us from practic­
ing meditation. These are cognitive obscurations. We need to purify 
ourselves of all these misdeeds and obscurations. Generally we would 
apply mindfulness and awareness and confess our misdeeds, but that 
is the common path. In the uncommon practices of the secret man­
tra, we meditate on Vajrasattva above the crown of our head because 
he is the lord of all the buddha families. Then amrita flows from his 
heart and into our bodies, filling us. This purifies all the illness in our 
bodies and all the misdeeds and obscurations in our minds. 
Sometimes we might practice tranquility meditation. We might be 
enthusiastic about doing it, but sometimes we have a lot of problems. 
Our mind will not rest as it is: it is not clear and many thoughts 
keep arising. We are not able to develop good tranquility meditation. 
When we want to tackle this problem directly, we apply mindfulness, 
awareness, and carefulness. We look to see if we have any agitation or 
dullness. We apply the remedies for those. We look to see if there are 
a lot of thoughts in our mind, and we apply the remedies for those. 
But sometimes it is better to do this indirectly rather than directly, 
and that is when we do the meditation on Vajrasattva and visualize 
that all the imprints from previous lives that prevent us from develc 
oping stable tranquility meditation are pacified. This will help our 
tranquility meditation. 
Sometimes when we do visualization practices of the creation 
stage, we have trouble visualizing clearly and our minds will not rest. 
This problem can happen, and the main method for getting rid of 
it is diligence, but Vajrasattva meditation will purify our imprints 
and help us in practices of the creation stage. It is also helpful with 
insight meditation. Sometimes our insight meditation is clear and 
good, but sometimes it is unstable. When their insight meditation is 
not clear or stable, many people ask me what they should do. One 
thing we can do is Vajrasattva practice, which, by purifying our mis­
deeds and obscurations, is very helpful. All of this is why we do Vajra­
sattva practice. 
37 
HELPFUL ADVICE FOR GOOD TIMES AND BAD 
When we do Vajrasattva practice, we can do the visualization and 
think that we are doing it to purify all our misdeeds and obscurations 
in general. But we can also think that we are doing it to purify a par­
ticular problem. If we often get very angry or jealous, for example, we 
can do Vajrasattva meditation to purify that. If we have a particular 
problem in our meditation, we do Vajrasattva practice to purify that 
problem. When we do the visualization, we visualize nectar flowing 
out ofVajrasattva's body and into us. As it flows into us, we think that 
it is purifying that specific problem: it is purifying our anger, our 
jealousy, or the panicular problem in our meditation. We think that 
the blessings ofVajrasattva are purifying that very problem. This is a 
panicular benefit of the meditation on Vajrasattva. 
We need something very sharp to purify our misdeeds and obscu­
rations. Resting in naturalness is very loose and relaxed. It has great 
blessings and the power of the dharma nature, but because it is so re­
laxed, it does not have the sharpness we need to purify misdeeds and 
obscurations. When we are trying to purify ourselves, we need to have 
the intent:.on to confess and purify our misdeeds. The repetition of 
the hundred-syllable mantra and the visualization of nectar flowing 
through ourselves and purifying us of our misdeeds and obscurations 
give Vajrasattva practice the sharp edge and power that purify us of 
our misdeeds. 
It is like when you get sick. There are some medicines that work in 
a very slow and gentle way, such as ayurvedic or homeopathic medi­
cine. If you take these medicines, they will gradually help you feel 
better. But sometimes you have a particular thing that hurts, and it is 
better to have an operation. The surgeon cuts the thing that hurts out 
of you and then you can get better quickly. Vajrasattva practice is like 
surge.ry that directly removes the root of the problem. 
Mandala Offerings 
This preliminary practice of Vajrasattva may dispel all our adverse 
conditions and problems, but we still might find ourselves in a po­
sition where our meditation is not progressing or developing. The 
reason is that not all conditions are adverse conditions; there are also 
THE GENERAL PRELIMINARIES 
favorable conditions. If we have purified all the adverse conditions 
but have not developed the favorable conditions, things will not 
go so well. Therefore we need to develop the favorable conditions, 
which are the accumulation of merit. If we have the support of the 
vast accumulation of merit, we will be able to truly develop realiza­
tion within ourselves. Our meditation will go very well and we will 
not have any difficulties. 
If we are doing the visualization stages of the creation stage, we 
will have clear visualizations and our practice will go well, without 
any difficulties. That is why the third preliminary is to accumulate 
merit by making mandala offerings. As Khenpo Gangshar describes: 
The mandala offering, which is the method for gathering 
the accumulations-the harmonious conditions. 
In order to accumulate merit, we need to be generous. We need to 
make offerings to the Three Jewels and be generous to the unfor­
tunate. Generally, we cannot actually give material things on such 
a large scale, but in the secret mantra vajrayana, there is another 
method of giving, which is to make mandala offerings. Offerings 
and generosity usually mean giving actual things, but the most 
important thing is the mind. As Shantideva says in The Way of the 
Bodhisattva: 
Transcendent giving, so the teachings say, 
Consists in the intention to bestow on every being 
All one owns, together with the fruits of such a· gift. 
It is indeed a matter of the mind itself. 
It is the good and kind thought, "I am going to make a gift" that 
is generosity, whether or not we actually give something. So when 
we make mandala offerings to accumulate merit, we do not take 
actual things and offer them. Instead we make vast offerings with 
our mind -we have a vast mental motivation. We imagine that we 
are taking the entire world along with all of its riches and prosper­
ity and everything else, and offer it to all the buddhas and bodhi­
sattvas. When we do this, we are able to accumulate vast amounts 
of merit. 
39 
HELPFUL ADVICE FOR GOOD TIMES AND BAD 
Gathering merit is an important point. Sometimes we have the 
right circumstances and our Dharma practice goes well. Sometimes 
we find ourselves in unfavorable circumstances, and it can be dif­
ficult. We need to do something to have more of the good condi­
tions. We need to get rid of bad or even just average conditions. The 
way to develop and increase favorable situations is to gather merit. 
In the sutras, it says that the Buddha had to gather merit for three 
uncountable aeons-a huge and vast accumulation of merit over an 
extremely long period of time. In the secret mantra vajrayana, it is 
not necessary to gather quite so much merit, but we absolutely must 
practice both the accumulation of merit, which has a focus, and the 
accumulation of wisdom, which does not have a particular focus. 
Guru Yoga 
Finally, in order to generate experience and realization quickly, we 
do the practice of guru yoga, which is a way to receive the blessings 
of the practice. As Khenpo Gangshar says, 
Guru yoga, the root of blessings and the means by which 
the special qualities of experience and realization quickly 
arise in your being. 
Once we have gotten rid of any adverse conditions and assembled 
the favorable ones, we need to develop experience and realization 
quickly. The way to do this is as mentioned in the "Short Vajradhara 
Lineage Prayer," which says, "Devotion is the head of meditation." 
We need to supplicate the lama and develop faith and devotion in 
him or her. If we have the faith and belief that we need to practice the 
lama's instructions, we will be able to truly develop high realization. 
We need to develop in our beings and our Dharma practice. We 
need to develop our samadhi meditation. We need to develop the 
creation stage of the deities and the completion stage. Through these 
we need to develop experience and realization. The general method 
for doing this is to be diligent, have pure perception, and develop de­
votion. But instead of doing that directly, we might want an indirect 
method, and that is the practice of praying to the root and lineage 
THE GENERAL PRELIMINARIES 
gurus through the practice of guru yoga. When we do guru yoga, 
we develop devotion in our beings. But what is devotion? At first, we 
are able to develop our meditation. Then we will be able to practice 
guru yoga, and through our practice we will develop faith and devo­
tion. This will make us more diligent, and then we will be able to 
receive greater blessings. 
Sometimes people think that blessings are something that will 
make them shake, tremble, and even levitate. But that is not what 
blessings are. Blessings are the power of the Dharma. When we en­
counter the power of the Dharma, we start to feel faith, and then we 
become diligent. We feel love and compassion, and we develop tran­
quility and insight. This is what blessings are. They are the absence of 
greed, aversion, and delusion. If we can entirely rid ourselves of those 
three things right away, that is wonderful, but even if not, we can 
decrease and suppress them. That is blessings. 
In general, blessings come from the Buddha, but we cannot meet 
the Buddha directly and we cannot hear him teach. Does this mean 
that we cannot practice? It does not. We can practice just as if we 
could meet and listen to the Buddha, because the blessings of the 
Buddha were passed on to the lineage lamas, who have passed them 
on to our root lamas. Our root lamas now give these blessings to us. 
This why the root lama is the root of blessings. 
Since we need to develop faith and supplicate the lamas, we do 
the practice of guru yoga so that we can receive the lamas' bless­
ings. When we receive greater blessings, it is easier for us to develop 
true experience and realization. . 
So these are the general preliminaries: refuge, bodhichitta, Vajra­
sattva, mandala, and guru yoga. We practice these "according to the 
general teachings." This means that we need to practice them con­
tinually. 
41 

PART TWO 
THE SPECIAL 
PRELIMINARIES: THE 
ANALYTIC MEDITATION 
OF A PANDITA 
fOLLOWING THE GENERAL PRELIMINARIES COME THE 
special preliminaries, which according to this system of teachings 
are called "the analytic meditation of a pandita." Khenpo Gangshar's 
instructions teach two different ways to meditate: the analytic medi­
tation of a pandita and the resting meditation of a kusulu. When 
we say "analytic meditation of a pandita," pandita means a scholar­
someone who is learned, examines phenomena, and develops intel­
ligence. This develops the power of their intelligence so that they 
are able to see the nature of things as they are. When we say "resting 
meditation of a kusulu," kusulu basically means someone who takes 
it easy and does not spend much time worrying about anything. 
Kusulus just sit down and get right to meditation without thinking 
things through too much. So the resting meditation of a kusulu is a 
43 
meditation where there aren't all that many thoughts and you just 
look directly at the nature of the mind. Of these two, the analytic 
meditation of the pandita is presented here as the preliminary, and 
the resting meditation of a kusulu is presented as the main practice. 
The text first discusses the analytic meditation of the pandita. Ana­
lytic meditation here does not mean to just analyze through logic 
and inference. Of course we are analyzing, but here we look at the 
nature of the mind to see what is it like. Experiencing that and fully 
comprehending it is the analytic meditation of the pandita. 
There is a difference between this analytic meditation of the pan­
dita and the use of the logic and reasoning of the middle way to 
come to a comprehension of emptiness. The distinction is that in 
the practices of the middle way, one uses only inference in order to 
examine how things are, and through this one develops certainty. 
You can come to see that all phenomena are emptiness: all external 
phenomena are emptiness and the internal mind is emptiness. This is 
a method that leads to certainty of the emptiness of all phenomena, 
but since that certainty is conceptually fabricated, it is difficult to de­
velop an actual experience of emptiness and the nature of phenom­
ena. In the analytic meditation of the pandita, however, we do not use 
inference to ~nalyze and examine. We use our experience to see where 
the mind is, what it is like, and what its essence is. This brings us not 
only to certainty, but to an actual experience of what the mind is like. 
This is the analytic meditation of the pandita. 
44 
4 
THE FOUNDATION 
KARMA, CAUSE, AND RESULT 
THE DISCUSSION OF KARMA, cause, and result that opens the 
text is the basis for all the instructions that follow. It is important 
for us to believe in karma, cause, and result. There are different kinds 
of people. Some people naturally have faith in the existence of past 
and future lives. They naturally have faith in karma, cause, and result. 
If you are one of these people, that is very good. But other people 
do not automatically believe in rebirth and karma. They think that 
the Dharma is good and helpful, but they have doubt about future 
lives. They wonder whether karma, cause, and result are really true. 
This just naturally happens; we can't blame them for it. However, it 
is important for us to have faith in karma, cause, and result because 
that faith is the root of our future happiness. Just about everyone in 
the world is sometimes very happy and sometimes suffers terribly. 
Why is this? Many people wonder whether this just happens at ran­
dom without any cause or whether some sort of god or deity makes 
it so. But it is not either of these. What causes our happiness or suffer­
ing is our previous actions. From doing good actions, we accumulate 
good karma and experience the resulting happiness. Similarly, from 
doing bad actions and accumulating bad karma, suffering results. 
This is the fundamental point of the Buddha's teachings, so it is very 
important for us to believe it. 
We need to understand the presentation of karma. We need to 
45 
THE ANALYTIC MEDITATION OF A PANDITA 
think about it and develop belief in it, but in and of itself, karma can 
be difficult to grasp. When the Buddha taught the Dharma, he taught 
that some things are gross phenomena that we can perceive directly. 
There are also some things that we may not be able to perceive di­
rectly, but that we can deduce through inference. But karma, cause, 
and effect are extremely subtle; we develop faith in them through 
the words of the Buddha. We cannot see it directly, and we cannot 
really infer it logically. We need to develop certainty through faith 
and belie£ This is why it is called extremely subtle, which makes it 
very difficult to perceive. However, if we carefully examine the teach­
ings on karma explained in the abhidharma, we can really develop 
belief in karma. 
It might seem hard to understand karma. But if we look at it, the 
teachings on karma simply say that if we have a good intention and 
do a good act, it will bring a good result. If we have a bad intention 
and do something bad, that will only bring a bad result-harm to 
ourselves and others. If you actually think about it, it is not all that 
difficult. 
DIFFERENT WAYS TO LooK AT 
KARMA AND RESULTS 
When the !3uddha taught about karma, he said that when we per­
form an action, it leads to a result. There are many different ways 
of thinking about karma. We can classify it according to when the 
result occurs or according to whether it propels a new rebirth or if it 
ripens during our lifetime. Alternatively, we can consider the manner 
in which the result occurs or the relationship between the intention 
and the action. These are a few of the different ways that karma can 
be categorized. 
Classifying Karma by When the Result Is Experienced 
If we think about karma in terms of when we experience the result, 
in general we can say that there are four types. The first is karma 
that is visibly experienced -that is, experienced in this life. The sec-
THE FOUNDATION: KARMA, CAUSE, AND RESULT 
ond is karma that is experienced upon birth---..,that is, in our next 
lifetime. The third is karma that is experienced in other lifetimes, 
and the fourth is karma that is not definitely experienced-that is, 
karma that may or may not be experienced in some future lifetime, 
depending upon circumstances. Our virtuous acts fall into these four 
categories, as do our misdeeds. The reason why there are many differ­
ent types of karma is that our motivations and actions can be of dif.. 
ferent strengths. Whether our motivation is virtuous or unvirtuous, 
sometimes it is strong and sometimes it is weak. Sometimes the act 
itself is very forceful and powerful; sometimes the act, whether virtue 
or misdeed, is small. Because of this, there are many different types 
of karma. 
Some of our acts are what we call karma that is visibly experienced: 
the act and the motivation are so strong that the result comes in this 
very life. If we do something extremely good and virtuous in this life, 
its result might be happiness in this very life. There are also instances 
where someone with a harmful intent does something so extremely 
negative and harmful that its result happens as sufferings, difficulties, 
and obstacles in this life. When the motivation is strong and the act 
is also strong, then the karma will. ripen in this lifetime as visibly 
experienced karma. 
Sometimes we perform actions that are not quite so strong, and 
so they do not ripen in this life but in the next lifetime after we take 
a new body. This is karma that is experienced upon birth: an action 
performed in one lifetime whose result ripens in the next. When you 
see people who are naturally happy and for whom everything always 
goes well, often this is the result of good acts in their last life. When 
you see people who are naturally unhappy and for whom everything 
is difficult, this is often the result of negative and harmful acts in their 
last lifetime. These would thus be the results of karma experienced 
upon birth. 
The third type of karma is karma experienced in other lifetimes. 
This is when the motivation is not strong and the act does not do 
such great help or harm. It is not such a great virtue or wrongdoing. 
Such acts do not ripen in this life or in the next, but if the right condi­
tions come together in the future, they will ripen then. 
47 
THE ANALYTIC MEDITATION OF A PANDITA 
Sometimes we perform actions that are quite weak-the act is 
weak and the motivation is weak. Because this karma is so weak, it 
is possible that it will not be experienced. A weak virtue might be 
overpowered by a stronger nonvirtue, or a weak misdeed might be 
overpowered by a strong virtue. For example, if we commit an action 
but later regret and confess it sincerely, the karma will not ripen on 
us, but if we do not feel regret and do not purify it, then when the 
right conditions come together, the karma will ripen. This is what we 
call karma that is not definitely experienced. 
Propelling Karma and Completing Karma 
Another way to explain karma in terms of the manner in which the 
result is experienced is to say that there are two types of karma: pro­
pelling karma and completing karma. Propelling karma is the karma 
that propels us to take birth in a particular body. Some beings take 
birth as humans, some as animals, and so forth. The act that makes 
us take birth as a human or an animal is our propelling karma. For 
example, as the result of performing a virtuous action, we might take 
a good birth such as a human birth. The act that initially causes us to 
take a human birth is a virtuous propelling karma. When the action 
that propels us to take birth is unvirtuous, it causes us to take a bad 
rebirth. An action that would cause rebirth as an animal, for example, 
would be an unvirtuous propelling karma. 
In this way, the different types of propelling karmas cause us to take 
various kinds of births, but once we have taken birth, there are many 
different ways that we can be. When born as humans, some people 
lead happy and wonderful lives, whereas some experience great prob­
lems and suffering. A being might be born as an animal but have all 
the food it needs, be comfortable, and lead a relaxed and good life. 
Other animals experience great suffering-constant hunger, thirst, 
fear, or other forms of suffering. In both instances, this is because the 
completing karma-the karma that affects how a being's life pro­
ceeds after taking birth-is different. 
In this way, the propelling and completing karmas are not neces­
sarily the same. You might have virtuous propelling karma but un-
Tlj.E FOUNDATION: KARMA, CAUSE, AND RESULT 
virtuous completing karma. For example, you might have virtuous 
propelling karma and be born as a human, but because of unvir­
tuous completing karma you might experience a lot of poverty, ill­
ness, and numerous difficulties in your life. Similarly, a being might 
have an unvirtuous propelling karma that causes birth as an animal, 
for example, but that animal might have everything it needs-food, 
drink, nothing to fear, and no problems. This is because its complet­
ing karma is virtuous. Sometimes both the propelling and com­
pleting karmas are virtuous. For example, one might be reborn in 
a human body or other good birth and then experience all sorts of 
joys-plenty of food, great happiness, wealth, and luxury. Sometimes 
both the propelling and completing karmas are unvirtuous, such as 
when a being is propelled by its propelling karma into an unfortu­
nate birth as an animal that because of unvirtuous completing karma 
has no opportunity for happiness in its life. 
There are many different types of karma that ripen throughout 
our lives. Sometimes something happens because of visibly experi­
enced karma. Or it might be karma experienced upon birth or ex­
perienced in other lifetimes. Or the karma that ripens now might 
have been not definitely experienced karma. Many of the events in 
our lifetimes are the ripening of different individual actions, so many 
different karmas come into play during our lives. Our lifetime is the 
result .of many different actions. We may have happy times during 
one period and hard times during another. We may be happy for 
years during which everything goes well, but then things turn sour 
for a few years. This is the result of different types of karma-some 
from acts committed in this life, some from previous lives. Even a he­
reditary medical condition or mental illness can result from karma. 
While the illness might have been inherited from your parents, it 
was the power of your karma to take birth with that particular set of 
parents, and in this way it comes out of the power of karma. 
Similar Experiences and Similar Deeds 
When we talk about karma from the Buddhist perspective, there are 
two different aspects that we need to distinguish: prior karma and 
49 
THE ANALYT.C MEDITATION OF A PANDITA 
the circumstantial conditions. Karma is the main thing, but circum­
stantial conditions can contribute to the results experienced. For in­
stance, sometimes you get sick because of karma, but sometimes it is 
because of external circumstances. Sometimes the cause is karma, but 
the circumstances are contributing factors. Different circumstances 
can lead to various types of happiness or suffering. 
But how do the results happen? In terms of karma, there are two 
different ways we can experience the result: as the results of similar 
experiences and as the results of similar deeds. The results of simi­
lar experiences occur when, for example, we have a bad intention and 
perform bad action- harming others. This will lead to a bad result 
in the future. Or you might have a good and kind intention and do 
something good, which brings a good result. This is the first way in 
which karma is experienced, as a similar experience. 
The second way is as a similar deed. What this means is that when 
you have a bad intention and do something bad, you habituate your­
self to doing bad things. Then in the future, it is easier to have that 
bad intention and do that bad thing again. Your intentions get worse 
and worse; your actions get worse and worse. Then at some point you 
think, "Wait a minute! This is not good. I'm not going to let myself do 
anything bad. I want to have good intentions. I want to train myself 
to do good things." Then you develop good and kind intentions. As a 
result, you get used to doing good actions, and it just gets better and 
better. This is a result of similar deeds from getting used to some­
thing. If we think about it, we can really see how this happens in the 
way we develop habits. 
Intentions and Acts 
If we look at karma in detail, we have to distinguish between our 
intention and the deed. The intention is mental, and the deed is the 
act that we perform with our body or speech. These two do not have 
to be similar, so there are four different possibilities. The first possibil­
ity is that we might have a white intention but do a black deed. This 
means that we have a good, positive intention, but do something bad. 
The second possibility is to have a black intention and do a white 
50 
THE FOUNDATION: KARMA, CAUSE, AND RESULT 
deed. This means that we have a negative, bad intention, and yet do 
something that seems positive. Or we can have a white intention and 
do a white deed, where we do something good with a kind intention. 
The fourth possibility is to have a black intention and do a black 
deed, where the intention and the deed are both negative. 
Of the four possibilities, which do we need? It is very important to 
have a white intention and perform white deeds. If we can do that, it 
is best. But the second best is to have a white intention and do black 
deeds. The deed may not be all that great, but the intention was good, 
so it is second best. These are the two types of karma that we need. 
The other two need to be given up. If we have a black intention and 
do a white deed, because the intention is bad, the act will not bring 
much benefit. It is likewise important to give up actions where both 
the intention and the deed are black. Understanding that we must 
give these up will be helpful for us. 
An example of a white motivation and a black deed would be par­
ents who love their children but speak harshly to them when they 
misbehave. Their motivation is the positive motivation to help their 
children, but their speech is harsh. Or sometimes we initially have 
the motivation to do something good, but we might be unable to 
resist a situation and end up saying something harsh or doing some 
other negative act. Another example comes from the Jataka tales of 
the previous lives of the Buddha, which tell of the lifetime when the 
Buddha was born as Captain Great Courage. He was sailing a ship 
with five hundred merchants to the islands of jewels, but there was 
one person on the boat, Black Spearman, who had the evil intention 
to kill all five hundred merchants, even if he should die in the pro­
cess. He went into the hold and began to bore a hole in the hull to 
sink the ship. Captain Great Courage saw what was happening and 
realized that not only would Black Spearman kill all five hundred 
merchants, he would also end up going to hell, so Captain Great 
Courage split his head with an axe and killed him. His motivation 
was good, but the deed-killing someone-was black. 
When we say that the motivation is white, that means that it is a 
pure motivation. If it is not all that pure, then it becomes a black mo­
tivation. We might think we have a pure motivation to help ourselves 
51 
THE ANALYTIC MEDITATION OF A PANDITA 
and others, but we might be mistaken about it and end up doing 
something harmful. For that reason we really need to examine our 
motivations extremely carefully. If our motivation is truly white, our 
acts can lead to vast benefit for a lot of people, but if we are con­
fused and it is really just a black action and a black motivation, that 
is something that we need to give up. Therefore, we need to analyze 
whether we have good or bad intentions and whether our actions 
are good or bad. Our acts will result in either help or harm to both 
ourselves and others. For this reason, Khenpo Gangshar says: 
It is an unfailing fact that happiness results from virtuous 
action and that suffering results from having committed 
unvirtuous karmic deeds. 
If you look at how we get habituated to actions, you can see that 
this is how it really happens. 
This is like the root of the Dharma. All of us-ourselves and 
others-want to be happy and free of suffering, but sometimes peo­
ple wonder if this is possible. It is possible: we can be happy if we do 
good things and take up virtue. The reason for this is that virtuous 
actions are the cause of happiness. We also want to be free of suffer­
ing. How is it that we can be free of suffering? To be free of suffering 
we need to abando11 its cause-misdeeds and nonvirtue. If we give 
those up, we can free ourselves from suffering. That is why karma is 
unfailing. For· that reason we need to take up virtue and abandon 
nonvirtue, but our ability to do so depends upon our understand­
ing of karma: it is important that we know what kind of act leads to 
what kind of result. 
Identifying Virtue and Wrongdoing 
If we are going to take up virtue and give up wrongdoing, we first 
need to know what they are. As Khenpo Gangshar says: 
Therefore, you must first recognize what is virtuous and 
what is evil. 
THE FOUNDATION: KARMA, CAUSE, AND RESULT 
We need to know what virtue is and then take it up and put it into 
practice. Likewise, if we want to be free of suffering, we need to know 
its cause-misdeeds and nonvirtue-and give it up. We need to iden­
tify what is good and what is wrongdoing, or evil. But what does vir­
tue mean? What is nonvirtue? These do not mean that there is a god 
who has commanded that you should not do this or that. Neither 
the Buddha nor anyone else has said that you are not allowed to do 
something, so if you do it, it is wrong. Instead, it comes down to your 
own mind. When you look at your mind, you can tell whether your 
acts are virtuous or unvirtuous. As it is said, if we act out of greed, 
aversion, or delusion, the act is unvirtuous. If we act out of nongreed, 
nonhostility, or nondelusion, then it is virtuous. This is something we 
can look at and see for ourselves. When we act with a kind heart and 
good motivation, without any greed or lust, without any aggression, 
and without any delusion, that is virtuous. If, on the other hand, we 
act with a bad motivation out of the greed that wants only to benefit 
ourselves, out of the aversion that wants to harm someone else, or out 
of delusion that does not know what to take up and what to give up, 
that is unvirtuous. 
Happiness results from virtue, and unhappiness from nonvirtue. 
If we look at how things are, we do not have to prove this logically. 
We all can see that when someone does something with an altruistic 
intention, it is beneficial for everyone. If someone does something in 
a malicious or harmful state of mind, with the wish to cause someone 
pain, it may seem to be successful in the short term, as if they got 
what they wanted, but ultimately it leads to unhappiness and misfor­
tune. As it is said: 
Distinguish good and bad intentions 
Instead of following the image of good and bad. 
This is what it says here, but it is not just what Khenpo Gangshar says. 
If we look at things around us, we can see it for ourselves. 
Sometimes when we look at things, it seems as if someone might 
do all sorts of terrible things but enjoy all sorts of happiness, wealth, 
and so forth. You might wonder how that happens. Sometimes there 
THE. ANALYTIC MEDITATION OF A PANDITA 
might be a person who has good intentions, always acts kindly, and 
only does virtuous things, but they always have problems, difficulties, 
pain, and hardship. It is possible that this can seem to happen in the 
short term, but it is not a situation where virtue and wrongdoing fail 
to produce appropriate results. Such a person's present difficulties are 
the results of negative acts they committed in the past. It is like when 
someone is moving away and needs to settle their debts before going: 
the karma from previous lives is ripening on them now. But this per­
son's good deeds of the present are the cause of future happiness. It 
is primarily through taking up virtue and abandoning wrongdoing 
that we bring ourselves happiness in the long term. 
In order to identify whether an act is virtuous or a misdeed, we 
need to determine what is the most important factor in committing 
it: our body, speech, or mind. As Khenpo Gangshar says: 
In order to do this you must determine which is most im· 
portant: your body, speech, or mind. 
When we perform virtuous actions, sometimes we do them with our 
body, sometimes with our speech, and sometimes with our mind. 
Likewise, we commit wrongdoing and nonvirtue with our body, 
speech, and mind. We act with all three, but we need to determine 
which of these is primary. Sometimes it might seem like one is more 
important than the other two, or that another is more important. 
So we need to determine which of these is most important, but in 
order to determine that, we actually have to understand what our 
body, speech, and mind are. When we don't think about it, sometimes 
these seem to overlap and sometimes they seem distinct, but the 
Buddha carefully ~plained in his teachings what our body, speech, 
and mind are. 
To decide this, you must understand what your body, 
speech, and mind are. 
And so what is the body? What is speech? And what is the mind? 
Sometimes it seems that identifying our body, speech, and mind 
should be self-evident and easy. In the old days in Tibet, Dharma was 
primarily taught to people who had an education and training. But 
54 
THE FOUNDATION: KARMA, CAUSE, AND RESULT 
Khenpo Gangshar started a new way of teaching: he taught to every­
one, including those without any education. Here he explains this to 
make it easy for those who had not studied much Dharma: 
The "body" is your physical body that serves as the support 
for benefit and for harm. 
So what is our body? In our Buddhist view, we call everything from 
the crown of our heads to the soles of our feet the body, with all the 
flesh, blood, bones, organs, and everything in between. Sometimes 
we feel pleasure, sometimes we feel happiness, and sometimes we feel 
like we have been helped in some way. Sometimes we suffer; some­
times we feel hurt or sickness. The support for the experience of plea­
sure or pain, the physical body made of flesh and blood, is what we 
mean by the body. 
"Speech" is the making of sounds and talking. 
Using the body, we can make vocal sounds: we are able to say kind 
or unkind words. We can have conversations with people and make 
other people understand our meaning. That is what we call speech. 
The "mind" is that which can think of and recollect any­
thing at all-that which feels like or dislike and at every 
. moment shows different expressions of joy and sorrow. This 
briefly explains the body, speech, and mind. 
The root of both the body and speech comes down to the clear aware­
ness that we call our mind. We often have many different types of 
thoughts that occur in our minds. Sometimes these thoughts are 
kind; sometimes they are bad. Sometimes we have good thoughts of 
love, compassion, or bodhichitta. We can have good and kind moti­
vations. Sometimes we have bad thoughts of greed, aversion, or delu­
sion. The mind is that which can generate any of these. Our mind is 
always changing-in an instant we might suddenly feel joyous, in 
another, we might feel unhappy. Because of having so many different 
thoughts and perceptions in our minds, we feel many instances of joy 
and displeasure, which we then express in many ways through our 
body or our speech. All of these are what we call mind. 
55 
THE ANALYTIC MEDITATION OF A PANDITA 
This instruction that we need to identify our body, speech, and 
mind does not appear in other spiritual instructions. But even though 
it is not found elsewhere, it is a particularly important instruction for 
our time. The reason is that today, many people think that our mind 
is our brain, or that the brain and mind are the same thing. The brain 
is something that can cause thoughts to happen, but if we examine 
it, we see that the brain is just matter. The mind is awareness. Their 
characteristics are dissimilar. The brain functions as a support for 
thoughts, but that does not mean that it is the mind. For example, if 
you pinch your arm, the arm is a support for thought even though it 
is not mind itsel£ It is the same with the brain. The Dalai Lama gives 
another example: crying out of a strong feeling of compassion and 
crying out of grief or sadness are very different in terms of motiva­
tion, but the brain activity is the same for both, despite the difference 
in emotion. If one occurred on the right side of the brain and the 
other on the left, for example, we could say there is a distinction in 
the brain, but we do not see any such difference. It is important that 
we recognize that our mind and brain are different-we should not 
confuse them. The mind is different from the body and the body is 
different from the mind. It is easy to see that speech is something dif­
ferent, ~ut it is harder to recognize that body and mind are distinct. 
Khenpo Gangshar says this solely for the purposes of knowing dis­
tinctly what the body, speech, and mind are. He is not discussing the 
ultimate nature of the body or the nature of the mind. He is simply 
saying, "This is what we label as the body. This is what we label as 
speech. This is what we label as mind." In terms of relative and ulti­
mate truth, this is on the level of relative truth. It is not about. the 
ultimate truth. 
DETERMINING WHAT Is MosT IMPORTANT 
Once we know what our body, speech, and mind are, what is it that 
performs virtue, and what performs nonvirtue? It is our body, speech, 
and mind: all three do both virtue and nonvirtue. We can do both 
virtuous and unvirtuous actions with our body. We can do both virtu­
ous and unvirtuous actions with our speech. We can do both virtuous 
THE FOUNDATION: KARMA, CAUSE, AND RESULT 
and unvirtuous actions with our mind. There are three nonvirtues 
of the body (taking life, stealing, and sexual misconduct), four of 
speech (lying, harsh speech, divisive speech, and idle chatter), and 
three of mind (covetousness, malice, and wrong view). There are like­
wise three virtues of body, four of speech, and three of mind-the 
opposites of the nonvirtues. But our acts of body, speech, and mind 
are not necessarily always virtuous or unvirtuous. There is a third 
type of action, neutral action, which is neither good nor bad. 
Although we can do virtuous, unvirtuous, and neutral acts with 
our body, speech, and mind, we need to see which of these is really 
the most important. As Khenpo Gangshar says: 
When you commit a virtuous or evil action, you must ask 
yourself, "Is the body the main thing? Is speech the primary 
aspect? Or is the mind most important?" 
When we commit acts, whether virtuous or unvirtuous, we do 
them with our body, speech, or mind. We need to identify which is 
committing the act, but we also need to determine which is actually 
most important. Whether you are investigating on your own or re­
sponding to questions from a master, you must examine which of the 
three-body, speech, or mind-is the strongest and most powerful. 
You must ask yourself, "Is the body most important? Is the speech the 
primary aspect? Or is the mind the most important?" 
Some people will reply that it is the body, some that it is 
speech, and some will say that the mind is the primary 
aspect. 
If you look at it superficially, some people answer that the body 
is the most important. The mind thinks of what to do, but it does 
not actually do anything. If you think of doing something good, it's 
not until you actually do it with your body that anything has been 
done. Similarly, when you have bad or malicious thoughts, the mind 
is thinking, but that is all it can do-it cannot actually go ahead and 
do that action-and therefore it cannot be the most important. The 
body actually performs the actions, and we can see it act. It is the 
body that causes harm to other reople or beings. It is with our bodies 
57 
THE ANALYTIC MEDITATION OF A PANDITA 
that we can he! p people and protect them from suffering. That is why 
some people think that among the body, speech, and mind, the body 
is obviously the most important. 
Other people think this is wrong because before you physically 
do something, you talk about it. Then you make the preparations 
and then perform the act. If you are going to help someone, first you 
talk about the nice thing you are going to do, then you prepare for it, 
and then you do it. Similarly, if you do something harmful, first you 
talk about it, then you prepare to do it, and finally, you commit the 
act. This is why it is possible that some people might think speech is 
more important than our bodies. 
Some people say that the mind is the most important because 
you cannot do anything without thinking of it first. Khenpo Gang­
shar says: 
In any case, whoever claims that the body or speech is most 
important has not really penetrated to the core with their 
examination. 
When you look at it superficially, the body performs the act-the 
mind just thinks and can't actually do anything-so you might think 
the body is more important. Similarly, we actually say things with 
I 
our speech--our mind just thinks but says nothing. But actually, the 
mind is most imp~rtant. If you say that the body is most important 
or that speech is most important, then you have not really gotten 
down to the heart of the matter. 
It is the mind that is the most important. The reason is that 
unless your mind intends to do so, your body cannot pos­
sibly do anything good or bad. Nor can your voice express 
anything good or evil. Your mind is therefore the primary 
factor. 
Whatever we do, the body will not commit any action without the 
mind first thinking of it, and our voice will not say anything unless 
we mentally decide to say it. This is why the mind is most impor­
tant: without it, you cannot perform any action either physical or 
verbal. The one to initiate any action is the mind. Only when the 
THE FOUNDATION: KARMA, CAUSE, AND RESULT 
mind thinks of it and decides, "I will do this good act," does the body 
act. Without the mind thinking of it, the body does nothing virtuous. 
Similarly, without the mind deciding to do something wrong, the 
body will not commit any misdeeds. When we have a conversation, 
it is only when the mind decides to say something nice or something 
hurtful that we say anything good or bad. If you look at the root 
of it all, the one who is driving the machine is the mind. For this 
reason, our body and speech are not as important; the mind is the 
main thing. 
Our happiness and suffering come from virtue and wrongdoing, 
and virtue and wrongdoing depend upon our minds. This is why 
the most important thing for us to do is to practice tranquility and 
insight meditation. We need to develop realization in our minds. Do 
we need to change our body in some way and then take up virtue and 
abandon nonvirtue? Do we need to alter our speech in some way? 
These are not the most important thing. The crux that it all comes 
down to is our mind. We need to transform our mind. We need to 
make sure that our mind does not go off in the wrong direction. We 
need to make sure that it goes in the right direction. The wrong di­
rection is delusion and ignorance, so if we put effort into developing 
our discernment, intelligence, and mental clarity, our minds will turn 
out well. This is why among our body, speech, and mind, the mind is 
most important. 
Khenpo Gangshar quotes a great meditation master of the past 
who also made this same point: 
The mind rules over everything like a king, 
The body is a servant for all good or evil deeds. 
In that way your mind is like a king and both your body 
and speech are its servants. 
The mind is the one with all the power, like the king or the presi­
dent. First it gives an order, and then the servants-the body and 
speech-perform the action. If the king-like mind does not say, "Go 
do that!" your body and speech will not perform any actions. 
In addition to physical and verbal actions, there are also events that 
THE ANALYTIC MEDITATION OF A PANDITA 
occur in our mind. For everything that happens in our mind, there 
are two aspects: the object we are thinking about and the mind itsel£ 
We also need to consider which of these two is most important. As 
Khenpo Gangshar says: 
For instance, when you get angry at your enemy you must 
examine whether the primary factor is your mind or the 
enemy. Similarly, when you feel attached to a friend, exam­
ine whether your mind or the friend is the primary factor. 
Sometimes we meet someone we do not like, we feel aversion to them 
and think of them as an enemy. Then we might get angry at them. 
But when we experience that anger or hatred, what is the primary 
factor-the enemy or our mind? Similarly, when we feel attached to 
a friend or relative, we need to examine whether the primary factor is 
our mind or the friend. We need to look at this carefully. 
Examining in this way, you must acknowledge that although 
the friend and enemy are the circumstances in which at­
tachment and anger arise, the real cause originates in your 
own mind. Thus, your mind is most important. 
When we look at this, the friend or enemy is a condition or circum­
stance that provokes anger or attachment, but the actual cause origi­
nates within ou~ minds. Therefore the mind is most important. 
There was a piCture taken ofKhenpo Gangshar at the time he gave 
these instructions which shows him holding a phurba, a three-sided 
dagger, in his right hand, pointing at his own heart. Why is he hold­
ing the phurba like that? Some people think that a phurba has the 
special power to stop ghosts, demons, and other obstructing spirits, 
so they keep a phurba on their body. They also think that if they fight 
an enemy, the phurba will block the enemy's weapon. But that is not 
the reason why Khenpo Gangshar points the phurba at his heart. 
Other people might say that a phurba is a powerful weapon that we 
can use to stab our enemies to prevent them from harming us. But 
that is not the case either-both of these are wrong. The phurba has 
three sides as a symbol of the antidotes for three poisons of desire, 
hatred, and delusion. But the three poisons of the afflictions are not 
6o 
THE FOUNDATION: KARMA, CAUSE, AND RESULT 
outside of us; they are within us. We do not need to stab something 
outside with the phurba; we stick it inside ourselves. That is why in 
the picture he isn't stabbing someone else with the phurba-he is 
pointing at his own heart. 
We might think that acting with our body and speech is good and 
wonder how it could help to meditate with our minds. We might 
think this ourselves or hear others say it. This is why this is such an 
important point. If you take control of your mind and have good 
thoughts, then your body and speech will naturally also be good. 
If you have bad thoughts in your mind, the body and speech will 
naturally go down the path of wrongdoing and harm. It is therefore 
important to recognize that the root of it all is our mind. This view 
provides the foundation for the following instructions. 
61 
5 
THE IMPORTANCE 
OF MIND 
WE NEED TO PRACTICE VIRTUE when doing the analytic 
meditation of the pandita. In order to bring ourselves hap­
piness, we need to do virtuous things, whether we want temporary 
or ultimate happiness. Temporary happiness means the enjoyments 
of this life-our food, clothing, possessions, and so forth. Ultimate 
happiness is the ultimate freedom from the suffering of samsara, the 
complete and perfect state of buddhahood. Bringing ourselves both 
temporary ~nd ultimate happiness is the purpose for which we need 
to practice virtue and give up nonvirtue. 
But how should we practice virtue? We can do virtuous things 
with our body, speech, and mind. But among these three different 
ways of practicing virtue, the primary way is with our mind. The 
mind is king and the. body and speech are its servants. If we take 
control of our mind and transform it in a virtuous direction, then 
our body and speech will naturally also go in a virtuous direction. 
That is why we need to make efforts to transform our mind first 
and foremost. 
We often experience attachment and aversion in our minds. When 
we experience them, the external objects such as our friends or en­
emies are conditions that help produce them, but the attachment 
and aversion actually arise from our own mind. This is why we need 
to examine which is most important. Is the enemy most important, 
62 
THE IMPORTANCE OF MIND 
or is the mind most important? When we think about it it, we see 
that the mind is what is most important. 
The great master Shantideva uses a metaphor to show how we can­
not eliminate all external problems, and so need to take care of our 
minds instead: 
To cover all the earth with sheets of leather­
Where could such amounts of skin be found? 
But with the leather soles of just my shoes 
It is as though I cover all the earth! 
If you are walking barefoot, there are all sorts of stones and thorns 
and things that will cut your feet. You might therefore think you 
need to cover everything up with leather so that you will not hurt 
your feet, but to do this you would need a very big piece of leather. If 
you want to keep going different places, you would eventually have 
to cover the entire world with leather. But that is not possible-there 
is just not enough leather in the world. So instead we can just cover 
our feet with leather. Doing that is the same as covering the surface of 
the entire earth with leather: we can walk wherever we want without 
hurting our feet. 
It is the same with external enemies. You might feel hatred for them 
and decide you must get rid of them. But once you have eliminated 
them; there is another enemy. If you get rid of them, too, then there 
will be yet another enemy, and in this way you will have more and 
more enemies. Eliminating the enemies just does not work. So what 
should we do? We should eliminate the enemy on the inside-our 
hatred. If we do this, then our outside problems also will be paci­
fied. Everything will then go smoothly for us. It is the same with the 
friends for whom we feel strong attachment. The attachment comes 
from our internal mind. If we do not do anything about it, the at­
tachment for the external object-our friend-will grow stronger 
and stronger. Then the afflictions of clinging, jealousy, and so forth 
will get stronger and stronger. But if in our own minds we are free of 
such attachment, we will not cling so tightly to our friends, and we 
will not have the difficulties that come from excessive clinging to our 
friends. This is why the mind is most important. 
THE ANALYTIC MEDITATION OF A PANDITA 
TRANSFORMING THE MIND: RELATIVE 
AND ULTIMATE METHODS 
We need to transform our minds, and generally there are two basic 
ways we can do this: transforming our minds through relative meth­
ods and through ultimate methods. If we want to use the relative 
methods, we need to rid our minds of ill will and develop our good­
will. In order to do this, we often train in relative bodhichitta, and 
in particular, the instructions on the lojong mind training. These 
instructions will help us develop goodwill and a kind heart toward 
others. We can use these methods to eliminate our ill will toward oth­
ers. The main method is to practice the tonglen sending and taking 
meditation. 
Sending and taking should be practiced alternately. These 
two should ride the breath. 
In the visualization of sending and taking, we imagine we are giving 
away all our happiness and goodness. If we are actually able to give 
away food, clothing, money, and other material things, that is great. 
But if we are not, we keep in mind the motivation to give our pos­
sessions and our happiness away. We imagine giving our happiness 
to othex:s. At the same time, we visualize taking their suffering away 
from them and upon ourselves. We generate strong love and com­
passion, and think to ourselves, "I'm taking away their suffering." We 
meditate upon giving our happiness away and taking others' suffer­
ing. Our meditation follows our breath-giving away our happiness 
on the exhalation, and taking others' suffering on the inhalation. This 
method helps us to develop a kind heart, and that in turn eventually 
helps us to develop bodhichitta. By developing bodhichitta, we will 
eventually be able to reach the state of perfect benefit for all sentient 
beings-buddhahood. 
There are many similar techniques included within the teachings 
on mind training. These are wonderful and helpful instructions for 
helping other beings and ourselves, for quelling our afflictions. But 
they are not included within Khenpo Gangshar's instructions. He did 
not teach relative methods; he primarily taught the ultimate meth-
THE IMPORTANCE OF MIND 
ods for transforming our minds. Within these ultimate methods, the 
main thing we need to do is tame our mind. 
Once you master you own mind, neither friend nor enemy 
will be able to benefit you or cause you harm. 
If we have control of our mind, when a condition such as an enemy 
appears, we will not feel anger, so there will naturally be no harm to 
ourselves or others. Similarly, when we see a friend or someone we 
feel affection for, we will not feel attachment and so we will not be 
harmed in any way. If we do not gain control over our minds, we will 
be powerless. The reason we meditate is that it is not the external 
object that is important; if we can transform our minds, the external 
object will not have much power over us. 
If you don't gain control over your mind, attachment and 
anger will automatically well up, wherever you go and 
wherever you stay. 
If we do not have control over our minds, we will naturally feel at­
tachment or anger wherever we go. No matter how far away we go, 
we will feel attachment or anger. They will well up automatically. 
You must understand that your mind is the root of all joy 
~nd sorrow, good and evil, attachment and anger. 
Whether we feel joy or sorrow, whether we experience good things 
or bad, what is most important is our mind. Pleasure, displeasure, 
attachment, and aversion arise, and when they do, among our body, 
speech, and mind, the mind is most important. Between the mind 
and the external object, again it is the mind that is most important. 
We need to understand this thoroughly. 
AvoiDING ExTREMES 
When the Buddha taught the Dharma, he said that we must not fall 
into extremes. There are two types of extremes-extremes of view 
and extremes of conduct. In terms of the extremes of conduct, the 
first is to fall to the extreme of sense pleasures. In the first part of his 
THE ANALYTIC MEDITATION OF A PANDITA 
life, the Buddha was born a prince, the son of a great king, and he 
had all the possessions he could possibly need. But he did not feel 
any attachment to them, and he gave them up-he renounced his 
kingdom with all its wealth and enjoyments. The Buddha saw that 
none of this had any essence, so he gave up all these pleasurable 
things. This illustrates not falling to the extreme of sense pleasures. 
The second extreme to avoid is that of austerities and difficulties. 
After he left the palace, the Buddha spent six years practicing aus­
terities in the forest. During that time, he took very little food or 
water-he just practiced. He strove single-mindedly to develop his 
meditation through austerities and difficulties. He did not wash-he 
just sat there practicing. Yet he realized after six years that these aus­
terities would not bring him to buddhahood, no matter how hard he 
practiced them, and so at that point he gave them up. He ate food, 
drank water, and took a bath, avoiding the extreme of austerities that 
could not bring him to full awakening. 
During the time when he was practicing austerities, the Buddha 
had a group of disciples who later became known as the Good Group 
of Five. When the Buddha gave up the austerities, at first they did 
not understand. They had thought the way he was practicing such 
austerities was wonderful-he had been so diligent! Then it seemed 
as if he l9st heart and got discouraged. When he started eating again, 
they were disappointed in him and rebelled. They left him, thinking 
they would never have anything more to do with him. 
It is important that we avoid the extremes of either austerities or 
sense pleasures. Neither of these will bring us to buddhahood. What 
will bring us there is to tame our own mind. Then we will be able to 
develop the samadhi meditation that will bring us to complete and 
perfect buddhahood. This is what the Buddha realized. After bath­
ing and taking food, he went to Bodhgaya and took his seat beneath 
the Bodhi Tree. He thought to himself, "I am going to sit here and 
meditate until I attain complete and perfect awakening." And that 
is what he did, sitting in deep samadhi until he awakened to com­
plete and perfect buddhahood. Once he had achieved that, he had 
perfected all the qualities of realization and totally given up every-
66 
THE IMPORTANCE OF MIND 
thing there was to abandon, realizing the profound, pure, peaceful 
Dharma. He realized: 
Deep, peace, unelaborate, luminous, noncompound­
Like nectar it is, this Dharma I've found! 
Whomever I teach it could not understand it, 
And so without speaking I'll stay in this wood. 
The Buddha realized the dharma nature just as it is-profound, 
peaceful, free of elaborations, luminous, and noncompounded, but 
he also thought that those to whom he taught it would not be able 
to realize it. It is difficult to find. And so in order to create the percep­
tion that Dharma is rare, he sat in perfect samadhi in solitude in the 
forest for seven weeks, enjoying his wonderful meditation without 
teaching the Dharma. 
While he sat there, in order to create the perception of the great­
ness of the Dharma, the gods Brahma and Indra came down and 
supplicated him to teach and turn the wheel of Dharma. The Buddha 
agreed, and he asked himself to whom he should first teach the 
Dharma. As he sat in samadhi, he looked within his meditation and 
saw the Good Group of Five who had rebelled against him a few 
weeks earlier. He thought he should teach the Dharma to them. Since 
they were in Varanasi, he went there to turn the wheel of Dharma 
for them. 
Now at that point the Good Group of Five had decided among 
themselves that they would have nothing to do with Siddhartha. At 
first he had been a prince, but he could not manage that. Later he 
tried austerities, but he could not handle that either. He couldn't 
handle anything, they thought, so they agreed that none of them 
should say a single word to him or listen to a single thing that he 
said. They would not even acknowledge his presence-they would 
just sit and ignore him. 
But when the Buddha arrived, he was glorious! He was so majestic 
that first one got up and knelt before him, and then a second, and 
a third, and soon they were all kneeling on their right knee, their 
left knee raised and hands joined in prayer at their hearts. It was the 
THE ANALYTIC MEDITATION OF A PANDITA 
magnificence of the Buddha that made it possible for them to come 
back to him, and then he turned the wheel of the Dharma for them. 
Which wheel of Dharma did the Buddha turn first? The Buddha 
realized that he had to teach the Dharma progressively, and so first 
he taught the relative truth, then the ultimate truth, and then the 
instructions on how to attain the ultimate result. Thus he taught 
the three wheels of the foundation vehicle, the great vehicle, and the 
secret mantra vajrayana, in that order. 
THE FIRST WHEEL 
Selflessness and the Foundation Vehicle 
When the Buddha turned the wheel of Dharma of the foundation 
vehicle, he primarily taught the four noble truths. Basically, the four 
noble truths come down to the selflessness of the individual. The 
teaching of the selflessness of the individual is important because we 
experience all sorts of suffering in samsara, and the root of all of this 
is karma. Where does karma come from? Karma results from our af­
flictions, primarily the three poisons of desire, aversion, and delusion. 
When we see something attractive, we feel desire for it. When we see 
something we don't want, we feel aversion toward it. This causes us 
to act and accumulate karma. 
Therefore we need to get rid of these afflictions, but how do we 
do that? If we simply think to ourselves that we will never again feel 
desire, aversion, or delusion, will that get rid of them? It will not­
we cannot just stop our desire, aversion, or delusion, because they 
happen automatically. We have been habituated to them since begin­
ningless time, and so they arise naturally. 
We need to get rid of them, but how? We cannot eliminate them 
directly, but we can do it indirectly by giving up their cause. That 
cause is clinging to a sel£ We think, "Me!" and cling to a sense of" me." 
We think, "I want something good," and then feel desire for it. When 
we think "That's going to hurt me," we feel aversion or hatred. When 
we do not understand the nature of the self, then we experience delu­
sion. It is this thinking "me" and clinging to an individual self that 
we need to eliminate. 
68 
THE IMPORTANCE OF MIND 
Can we just think to ourselves that we will not cling to a self any­
more? Will that work? It will not, because from beginningless time 
until now, we have had the habit of clinging to "me" and "mine." We 
cannot just say we won't do that anymore, but that does not mean we 
cannot get rid of it. We can look to see what ego-clinging is rooted 
in. If we can pull it out from its roots, then we will also get rid of 
the branches. 
What is clinging to a self rooted in? Actually, it is not rooted in 
anything. If we see that, then naturally ego-clinging will not happen. 
The reason it has no root is that when we look for the object that we 
are clinging to as "me," as a self, we cannot find it. 
When we talk about clinging to a self, often we talk about clinging 
to "me" or clinging to "mine." We think, "Oh, this is me" and we cling 
to whatever that is. Or we think, "I want that thing. This is mine." But 
when we really look at what this "me" is, where is it? We cannot re­
ally find it anywhere. When we see there is really no "me" to cling to, 
then naturally the thought of clinging to "me" is going to be pacified. 
Likewise, there can be no "mine." When we cling to a "me" or "mine," 
then we want things or we feel aversion to them, and this makes all 
of the afflictions arise. Because of the afflictio~s, we are stuck in sam­
sara. But if we realize that "me" and "mine" do not really exist at all, 
then clinging to a "me" and "mine" will naturally be quelled. And if 
that is quelled, then the afflictions will naturally be pacified. That is 
why we meditate upon the selflessness of the individual. 
In investigating this, if we first think about clinging to "mine" and 
realize that there is not really any object to cling to, then we will 
understand that clinging to "mine" is illusory. Then it will be easy 
to realize that clinging to "me" is also illusory. For instance, if I have 
a glass of water on the table, I cling to it as being mine. But what is 
it really? Someone put a glass here and poured water into, so now 
I say that it is my water, but what is the reason for saying so? There 
really is no reason. But I cling to it, and if someone came and drank 
it, then I would get angry-how dare he drink my water! That is 
how the afflictions arise out of clinging to "mine," but if you examine 
this situation, what is the connection between me and the water? 
There is no real connection between the two, so how could it really 
THE ANALYTIC MEDITATION OF A PANDITA 
be mine? But even though there is no connection and there is not 
any real "mine," we think there is, and thinking that way makes us 
get angry. 
Let's consider an example of how clinging to "me" and "mine" cre­
ates suffering. If we were to go into a store and a watch that was for 
sale fell on the floor and broke, we would not think much of it. But 
if we were to drop our own watch and it broke, we would feel upset. 
If the mechanism broke and it stopped, we would be unhappy. If we 
look to see what this comes from, it comes from saying the watch is 
"mine." But where is the "mine"? If we look for it, we will not find 
it inside the watch, or outside, or between the outside and inside. 
Actually, there is not much difference between the watch in the store 
and our own watch, but because we cling to one as "mine," we experi­
ence feelings of suffering. If there were no thought of "mine," there 
would be no suffering. If we examine our clinging to objects and 
see that there really is no "mine," and we realize egolessness, this is 
very beneficial. 
Similarly, when we think about our body and mind we often think 
"my body" or "my mind." But sometimes we think "the body is me" 
or "the mind is me." Sometimes we think of them as being "me" and 
sometimes as something that we possess. When we think, "This is 
my mind," it is as if"me" is something other than mind. Or we think, 
"This is my body," as if the "me" were again something other than the 
body. Sometimes the body and mind are "me," sometimes they are 
"mine," and in the end we cannot be certain what "me" is. If we look 
for it in this way, we are unable to find anything that we definitely 
know to be the sel£ 
When we realize that there really is no self, then we can meditate 
on that. First we study it and develop certainty in it. Then we can 
meditate on it and actually realize the selflessness of the individual. 
When we realize that, we can eliminate all of the afflictions. When 
they have been eliminated, we will stop performing karmic actions, 
will no longer wander in samsara, and we will achieve the status of 
an arhat. Thus, this is the way to tame our own minds-the method 
taught in the foundation vehicle for realizing the selflessness of the 
individual. 
70 
THE IMPORTANCE OF MIND 
THE SECOND WHEEL 
Emptiness and the Great Vehicle 
The second time the Buddha turned the wheel of Dharma, he gave 
the teachings of the great vehicle or mahayana about the emptiness 
of all phenomena. These are the teachings on transcendent intelli­
gence, which primarily teach that all phenomena are empty and self­
less. Thus there are two types of selflessness: the selflessness of the 
individual and the selflessness of phenomena. 
In the mahayana, there is the tradition of the middle-way school. 
Whether we are discussing the view of the self-empty or other-empty 
schools, the middle way proposes that we need to abandon the afflic­
tions, which are the root of everything. If we can do so, we will be 
able to abandon the suffering of samsara. The method by which we 
can abandon the afflictions is to meditate on the essence of all phe­
nomena and realize that it is emptiness. Everything that appears to 
us is just a confused perception. All phenomena are like dreams and 
illusions. By meditating on the selflessness of phenomena in addition 
to the selflessness of the individual, we can understand this dreamlike 
or illusory nature of everything we perceive. Then when suffering 
occurs, it does not harm us. You may dream of something, but when 
you wake up it is not there and you are freed from any pain or suffer­
ing that the confused perception of it produced. This is why we need 
to realize emptiness. If when afflictions arise, we know that they do 
not inherently exist and we meditate on that and see the nature of 
emptiness as it is, we can attain the ultimate result. 
The method taught in the middle-way school to realize the emp­
tiness of all phenomena is to carefully consider and contemplate 
the reasoning that leads to this conclusion. Therefore in the mid­
dle way one examines phenomena and tries to see what they are 
like. How do they arise? After they have arisen, how do they stay? 
Then how do they cease? We examine this in great detail with ex­
tremely subtle reasoning, including the logic that examines causes, 
essence, and so forth. We can follow this logic and develop an un­
derstanding and definite recognition that everything is emptiness. 
If we meditate on this, we no longer experience any fear, pain, or 
71 
THE ANALYTIC MEDITATION 01' A PANDlTA _ 
attachment from our confused perceptions and we realize they are 
emptiness. 
Within the middle way there are different ways of doing this. In 
the tradition of the self-empty school, we first come to understand 
the emptiness of all phenomena. By seeing and understanding this, 
we can rid ourselves of confused perceptions. In the approach of the 
other-empty school, we meditate not only on the emptiness of all phe­
nomena, but that the essence of this emptiness is all the qualities-it 
is buddha nature. But in both the self-empty and the other-empty 
school, we are primarily examining reality with logic and reasoning. 
After contemplating the reasons, we develop the understanding that 
this is how things are and then meditate on that. 
At the root of everything are the afflictions; as a result of the afflic­
tions we see all the confused appearances of samsara. But these con­
fused appearances do not inherently exist, and so the Buddha used 
examples to show that they are empty. First we think about coarse 
outer objects. Such objects, if they really exist, must be either single 
or multiple. But when we look for a single thing, we cannot find it 
because coarse outer objects are actually made up of multiple atoms 
all grouped together. All of the external things we can see are nothing 
more than an agglomeration of tiny particles-there is nothing else 
there. For instance, if we have a pile of dirt we can call it a pile, but ac­
tually it is just a bunch of dirt that happens to be heaped up together. 
We think that there is one solid thing but actually, if we examine it, 
it is all these other litde things all brought together. That is why you 
cannot really say that coarse outer things have any reality-you can­
not find the real coarse thing there. You can prove through logic that 
coarse things are all collections of particles. 
Then when we think about particles, they are really nothing other 
than just something that appears to our mind. In reality, they do not 
inherently exist-we cannot find them. This is what the Buddha 
taught, and later masters have explained it in the treatises. In mod­
ern physics (although I do not know the subject well), they also say 
that particles cannot be established-they are just capacity or en­
ergy coming together, but actually there is no real thing there. These 
teachings-the teachings of the Buddha, the teachings in the treatises, 
72 
THE IMPORTANCE OF MIND 
and the views of the scientists-are essentially the same: they all say 
that coarse phenomena cannot be truly established. When we realize 
this, we see that all phenomena are empty. When we see that, we real­
ize that the objects toward which we feel attachment or aversion do 
not have any real existence of their own. Thus, by realizing emptiness 
we are able to realize the nature of all phenomena. 
This is how we examine external things logically and come to know 
what they are like. We can then meditate on this and thus really come 
to understand and know that they are empty. 
Our mind is similar, but instead of thinking in terms of panicles, 
we can think about it in terms of time-years, months, days, or 
hours. Our mind is changing each and every moment. Can any given 
moment be established as anything? Some people say that there is 
a finite, indivisible moment of time, but such a moment cannot be 
proven to actually exist and thus must also be emptiness. 
In this way, external objects are empty and the internal mind does 
not inherently exist. We can contemplate this and come to know it. 
Then we can meditate on it. But our meditation needs a helper, and 
the helper that it needs is the six transcendences. The most important 
helper is transcendent intelligence, which is realizing the dharma 
nature just as it is. This is not just blind faith. It is a question of ex­
amining it, understanding it, and really developing true conviction. 
Then when you have this conviction, you meditate upon it. Through 
meditation you gain a clearer and clearer perception of it. That 
clear perception of the nature of things is transcendent intelligence, 
prajiiaparamita. As a helper to develop that, we need the other five 
transcendences: transcendent generosity, discipline, patience, dili­
gence, and meditation. These are the helpers which help us develop 
wisdom so that we can achieve the ultimate result of buddhahood. 
This is the path taught by the great vehicle. 
THE THIRD WHEEL 
Buddha Nature and the Vajrayana 
If the emptiness of all phenomena were blank nothingness, it would 
be inanimate, material emptiness. With humans, for instance, if the 
73 
THE ANALYTIC MEDITATION OF A PANDITA 
body has clear awareness, it is a person, but if there is no clear mind, 
it is just a corpse. It is similar with emptiness. There is emptiness that 
has clarity and emptiness that lacks clarity. If emptiness has no clarity 
at all, then it is inanimate emptiness, such as, for example, the void of 
space. Nothing bad can happen to it, but no qualities can arise within 
it, either. It does not have any potential; it is inert. 
Is the empty nature like that? It is not. The emptiness of all phe­
nomena has clarity and the aspect of clear wisdom. It has the clarity 
that during the pure phase has the potential to arise as the wisdom of 
a buddha and during the impure phase can arise as all the impure ap­
pearances of interdependence. Emptiness and this clarity are unified. 
When we do not recognize this, we are confused, but if we recognize 
it, it is the potential or seed for achieving all the qualities of buddha­
hood. This is present within all sentient beings; it is buddha nature. 
Thus in the first wheel of Dharma, the Buddha taught the selfless­
ness of the individual. In the second wheel of Dharma, he taught emp­
tiness. And in the third wheel of Dharma, he taught that emptiness 
is one with clear wisdom, that the cause of buddhahood is present 
within the mind streams of all beings. The actual thing we meditate 
on-the root of our practice-is emptiness, but not inanimate emp­
tiness like space. It has the potential for the Buddha's wisdom to arise. 
Buddhas have wisdom, love, and power. The seed for this wisdom, 
love, and power is present in emptiness. This emptiness permeates us 
all. This is the meaning of the third wheel of Dharma. 
These teachings of the foundation and great vehicles were brought 
to Tibet, but when we practice Tibetan Buddhism, do we actually 
meditate on the view of selflessness from the foundation vehicle? Ac­
tually, no, we do not really meditate on it that much. Do we follow 
the methods of meditating on emptiness from the mahayana? Well, 
actually we do not spend a whole lot of time meditating on that, 
either. We primarily meditate upon the instructions of the secret 
mantra vajrayana. 
However, when we are studying, we try to fully comprehend the 
foundation-vehicle view of the lack of an individual self and the 
great-vehicle view of emptiness. You might think it is just some sort 
of mere intellectual exercise-we are just thinking for thinking's 
74 
THE IMPORTANCE OF MIND 
sake. But that's not really what it is. This is actually a way of com­
ing to understand how things are. Then when we come to practicing 
the instructions from the secret mantra vajrayana on the nature of 
the mind, we are able to have real certainty in them. We're able to 
really believe them fully. This is why when we practice the Dharma 
in the Tibetan tradition, first we study the views of the foundation 
and great vehicles thoroughly. Through this we develop certainty so 
that when we come to a critical point in our practice we will realize, 
"That's what that is!" This is why studying is very helpful for our 
meditation. 
The Path of Means and the Path of Liberation 
Within the instructions of the secret mantra vajrayana, there are two 
different types of paths that we can practice: the path of means and 
the path of liberation. The path of means includes the practices of 
the creation stage, which consists in visualizing ourselves as a yidam 
deity or visualizing the deity before us. There are many different 
types of creation-stage practices we can do: the practices of Vajra­
sattva, Manjushri, Tara, Vajravarahi, Guru Rinpoche, and so forth. 
This is meditation on the body of a deity. Although creation-stage 
med~tation is not taught in these instructions, if you practice it, it 
will be very helpful. But it is part of the path of means and is not 
included here. 
Sometimes we also visualize the deity's body dissolving into the 
absence of a focus-emptiness. That is a practice of the completion 
stage. There are actually two different types of completion-stage 
practices: those with attributes and those without attributes. Com­
pletion-stage practices with attributes are practices such as tummo, 
dream yoga, or various other methods-there are many different 
methods for completion-stage practices. These are all part of the path 
of means. 
The path of liberation is just getting right down to meditation. 
When we meditate on the path of liberation, all phenomena are 
empty, and we first establish a full understanding of the selflessness 
of the individual and of dharmas. But if we were to meditate upon 
75 
THE ANALYTIC MEDITATION OF A PANDITA 
outside objects, we would be using logic to generate belief and con­
fidence in emptiness. We could say, "Yes, that's really what it is like." 
But it is difficult for such meditation to lead to an actual experience 
of emptiness. That is why in the sutra practices of the great vehicle 
we talk about gathering merit through the practices of the six tran­
scendences and why it takes a long time-uncountable aeons-to 
achieve the ultimate result. 
But the practices of the secret mantra vajrayana do not take an 
uncountable number of aeons. In the best of circumstances, we can 
do these practices and attain complete buddhahood in one lifetime 
and one body. If we cannot do it in one lifetime, then we can do it 
in perhaps three, seven, or sixteen lifetimes. We will be able to attain 
buddhahood in that period, which is why this is called the fast path. 
What is the special feature of the fast path? Although we recognize 
that external objects are empty, we do not pay much attention to 
them. Instead, the root of what we do is to just look at the nature of 
the mind. Why do we do that? Although external things are empty, 
when they appear to us we do not see that they are just a projection of 
our inner mind; we do not see that they are empty. They seem solid. 
We can think that solid-seeming things are empty all we want, but it 
is very difficult to actually realize this. 
It is different if we look at our own mind. Before we examine 
the mind, we have many different thoughts and motivations-the 
mind-can think up anything at all. As we discussed above, the mind 
is like a powerful king who rules over everything. But if we look at 
the nature of that which is exercising power, we see that it cannot 
be established as anything. We can't say it stays here, it goes there, it 
is over there,. There's nothing definite there. It is as if it were some 
false thing that appears. But if we look at the essence of that appear­
ance, it is easy to see that the essence of the mind is emptiness. If 
we think about it, it is easy to understand that the mind is empty, 
and if we look at the nature of mind, it is actually relatively easy to 
have an experience of emptiness of the mind. If we look at external 
things like houses, mountains, forests, or what have you, it is very dif.. 
ficult to come to an experience of emptiness. We might think, "Oh, 
that's empty," but immediately having some sort of experience of that 
THE IMPORTANCE OF MIND 
emptiness is really very difficult. That is why we look at the nature of 
the mind. 
When we look at the nature of the mind, we can use inference, or 
instead we can use direct perception: we can experience this through 
the wisdom of self-awareness. We can actually come to an experience 
of the empty nature of the mind. But we see that emptiness is not 
just some sort of blank, inanimate void. Rather, emptiness has a clear 
aspect and the capacity to appear as anything. It is not like the empti­
ness of space. When we talk about how things can be empty, there are, 
in general, two different ways that things can be empty. Something 
can be empty like empty space, but that emptiness cannot really do 
anything for us. It does not help us in any way; it cannot really bring 
us anything. The emptiness of the nature of mind is not like that. 
Whether we call it the nature of mind or the dharma nature, this 
emptiness can develop into all the various qualities of a buddha. It is 
empty but knowing at the same time. A simple way to explain this is 
to call it the union of clarity and emptiness . .The mind is empty, but at 
the same time it is clear and knowing; that clarity is also empty. These 
two are brought together and unified. 
If we look at it on a more profound level, we would call this the 
union of the expanse and wisdom. Expanse means the dharma ex­
panse-the expanse of the nature of all phenomena that is naturally 
empcy, the dharmadhatu. Wisdom refers to the clear wisdom that 
arises. The essence of that clear wisdom is emptiness, but this empti­
ness is not blank and inanimate. The practice of the secret mantra is 
to experience this and meditate upon it. 
77 
6 
APPEARANCES 
AND MIND 
THE KEY POINT IS THAT the mind is primary, but we can take 
control over it. It is easy to do so. It is easy to realize its nature, 
and so we are extremely fortunate. This is why in vajrayana practices 
in general, and in mahamudra and dzogchen in particular, we put 
emphasis on the mind and meditate on it. When Khenpo Gangshar 
teaches that the mind is most important, the source for this instruc­
tion is Longchen Rabjam, a great master who was a contemporary 
.>f the Third Karmapa Rangjung Dorje. Khenpo Gangshar cites two 
'passages from Longchenpa. The first passage reads: 
The Great Omniscient One has said: 
When under the influence of dhatura, 
All the various experiences you have, whatever they 
maybe, 
Are all, in fact, mistaken images without existence. 
Likewise, understand that under the influence of a 
confused mind 
All the mistaken experiences of the six classes of beings, 
whatever they may be, 
Are all empty images, nonexistent yet appearing. 
APPEARANCES AND MIND 
The Great Omniscient One is an epithet for Longchen Rabjam. He 
wrote a great number of extensive and helpful treatises, the most 
profound of which are collected in a text called The Seven Treasuries 
of Longchenpa. What Longchenpa said, in describing how things 
appear to us, is that various things appear to us, but even though 
they appear, they are not inherently real. This is what we call emp­
tiness in the treatises on transcendent intelligence and the middle 
way. Although things do not truly exist, they appear solid in our 
confused, relative perception. The reason they are confused appear­
ances is that they are like the hallucinations one sees after taking 
dhatura, a hallucinogenic plant also called thorn apple. When you 
take dhatura, you see different colors and shapes or hear many 
different sounds. You might feel ecstatic, or you might feel very 
depressed. But all of the experiences that you have while high on 
this hallucinogen are in fact mistaken images. They are not really 
there. They appear to you, but they do not exist in any way. This is 
the analogy. 
The meaning of the analogy is that it is the same with us now. Just 
as if we had taken a hallucinogen, whatever happy or sad appearances 
we see are samsaric, confused appearances of the mind. Even when 
we are not intoxicated, everything we perceive in this life comes out 
of the confusion that arises from the power of karma. Whether we 
have the perception of being human or animal, whether we perceive 
the appearances of earth, water, fire, or air, whatever appearances we 
see come out of the power of a mistaken mind. All the external forms 
we see or sounds we hear are just emptiness. Whatever appears inter­
nally within our mind is also just emptiness-none of it is actually 
there. Thus all of the different experiences of the six classes of beings, 
whatever they may be, are empty images, nonexistent yet appearing. 
Longchenpa and Khenpo Gangshar are saying the same thing: the 
mind is the root of everything. 
This passage teaches that all appearances are our mind-they arise 
within our mind and they cannot be established outside of ourselves. 
Because of this, we need to follow the instruction given in the second 
quotation from Longchenpa:. 
79 
THE ANALYTIC MEDITATION OF A PANDITA 
Since they appear in your mind and are constructed by 
your mind, 
Exert yourself in taming this mistaken mind. 
External appearances appear to the mind, but they are just a construc­
tion of the mind-when they appear, the mind gives them a label. 
For that reason, even if outside things seem good, there is not actu­
ally a whole lot to be attached to. If they seem bad, there is nothing 
to feel aversion toward. Therefore if we want to be free of suffering 
and faults and find happiness and good qualities, the most important 
thing is to tame our mind and to be diligent about doing so. This is 
why we meditate, and this is why there are mind instructions. Since 
the mind is the root of everything and everything comes down to 
the mind, there is nothing more important than taming our mind, 
meditating on samadhi, and resting in equipoise. 
The first passage says that appearances are mind; they are not sepa­
rate from mind. The second passage says that we need to thoroughly 
tame our own mind. These are Longchenpa's instructions. Next, 
Khenpo Gangshar gives his own advice: 
But you shouldn't take your understanding from books or 
stories heard from others. Recognize, yourself, that appear­
ance is mind and understand that your mind is the root of 
all phenomena. 
We must not take all of our understanding from what we read. If we 
have understanding from a book, we will think the book says such 
and such so it is probably something like that. You read something 
in a book and then think, "Oh, that's how it probably is." Maybe you 
have studied the logic of the mind-only school and think, "It's all 
mind. Everything that appears is mind." This is just a conceptual un­
derstanding, and it is not all that helpful. You might hear someone 
say something like this, and think, "So-and-so said they're all just ap­
pearances in the mind, so it must be like that." On one level we know 
it; it is okay. But it is really not enough. What we need is not a concep­
tual understanding that comes from study and reasoning; we actually 
need to have the experience of it. 
So 
APPEARANCES AND MIND 
THREE WAYS OF KNOWING 
There are three ways in which we can know something. We can have un­
derstanding, we can have experience, or we can have realization. Under­
standing is when you think about something through inference. Your 
mind is directed outward and you think, "Oh, it is probably like that." Is 
that understanding good? Of course it is, but it does not have the power 
to help us develop the ultimate qualities that we really need. So it is not 
enough. It is not enough because it is not an internal meditation. Instead, 
it is turning the mind outward and thinking about external things. This 
is what is meant here by understanding, and it is not what we need. 
You might also know something through hearsay or stories. You 
might have heard someone say that is how it is-"They say that appear­
ances are all mind." You might think some great lama or great scholar 
said so. "There's this great mahasiddha who taught this and that's prob­
ably how it is." But that is not what we need; that is also just mere un­
derstanding. Of course learning things through reading and listening to 
teachers is good, but it can't really produce realization. This is why we 
should not rely solely on what we read in books or on hearsay. 
We need to experience and realize the nature of the mind for ourselves. 
Experience comes when we are meditating and we think to ourselves, 
"This is what the mind is like!" But this is not stable at first. We need to 
meditate on it and cultivate that experience, and eventually it will be­
come stable, which is what we call realization. We need to turn our mind 
inward to look at itsel£ We can recognize for ourselves that appearance 
is mind and that the mind is the root of all phenomena, both external 
appearances and all our afflictions. This is recognizing that appearances 
are mind. We need to know this, but it should not just be an understand­
ing. We cannot just leave it as something we heard from someone; we 
need to develop an experience of it within our own minds. 
THE MAHAMUDRA PRESENTATION 
Mind, Appearances, and Coemergence 
In the instructions of mahamudra, this is called recognizing that 
appearances are mind. In the mahamudra teachings, the Ninth 
81 
THE ANALYTIC MEDITATION OF A PANDITA 
Karmapa Wangchuk Dorje explains this in his book Pointing Out the 
Dharmakaya. The book has ten chapters on insight meditation, five 
of which are about the view and five about pointing out. One of the 
five chapters about the view presents the view that appearances are 
mind, and one of the five chapters on pointing out is called "Pointing 
out that appearances are mind." These chapters present essentially 
the same teaching as Khenpo Gangshar does here. Wangchuk Dorje 
also gives essentially the same instructions in Eliminating the Dark­
ness of Ignorance, but in his longer treatise, Mahamudra: The Ocean 
of Certainty, he presents the instructions a little bit differently. He 
treats looking at the mind in stillness and looking at the mind in 
motion very briefly, and then discusses recognizing appearances as 
mind much more extensively. He presents four points: appearances 
are mind, mind is empty, emptiness is spontaneous presence, and 
spontaneous presence is naturally liberated. The words are different, 
but the meaning is basically the same. 
The fifteenth-century master Takpo Tashi Namgyal also wrote 
two books of mahamudra instructions. The longer work is called 
Moonbeams of Mahamudra, and the shorter is called Clarifying the 
Natural State. Both of these treatises make essentially the same point, 
al_though it is a bit more detailed in Moonbeams of Mahamudra and 
briefer in Clarifying the Natural State. These texts use three terms­
coemergent mind-essence, coemergent appearance, and coemergent 
thoughts-which were also used by Lord Gampopa. 
Coemergent mind-essence means looking at the nature of the mind 
and seeing that it is coemergent. This is not a question of whether or 
not we realize the nature of mind. The essence of the mind occurs at 
the same time as mind, and the presence of the mind-essence in that 
very moment is what we call the coemergent mind-essence. When 
we see that the mind-essence is coemergent, this means that we know 
the nature of the mind fully and thoroughly. 
Because we really know the nature of the mind and its coemer­
gent essence, we see that appearances are coemergent with it-they 
arise at the same time as the nature of the mind. There is nothing 
new that happens when we recognize the nature of appearances. This 
APPEARANCES AND MIND 
mea~s that appearances are naturally the same as the essence of the 
mind: they are also naturally empty of essence. That is coemergent 
appearance. 
When Gampopa taught this, he said, "The coemergent mind­
essence is the dharmakaya. Coemergent appearance is the radiance of 
the dharmakaya." Gampopa had a disciple named Je Gomtsul, who 
also happened to be his nephew. Je Gomtsullistened to these instruc­
tions and added a third line: "Coemergent thought is the energy 
of the dharmakaya." The movement of all our thoughts is like the 
power of the dharmakaya. Coemergent thought means that thoughts 
are not something that we throw away and only then does wisdom 
occur. The two happen simultaneously. 
These are the three types of coemergence taught in both Moon­
beams of Mahamudra and Clarifying the Natural State. What Khenpo 
Gangshar is teaching here is coemergent appearance-how we need 
to recognize that appearances are mind. 
DISTINGUISHING APPEARANCES AND 
PERCEIVED OBJECTS 
In general, all appearances are mind, but when beginners meditate 
and receive mind instructions, they easily see that some things are 
mind but have difficulty seeing other things as mind. This is why 
in the context of this presentation, Khenpo Gangshar says that we 
need to differentiate appearances from perceived objects. As the 
text says: 
In this context, you must distinguish between appearance 
and the perceived object. 
Appearances are all the feelings we have-greed, aversion, love, 
compassion, guilt, depression, joy, excitement, or anything else. These 
appear in the mind and anyone can easily see that these are mind. 
When we say perceived objects, we mean the forms, sounds, smells, 
and so forth, that are the objects of our senses. These seem like mate­
. rial objects that exist outside of ourselves. 
THE ANALYTIC MEDITATION OF A PANDITA 
It was Longchen Rabjampa who said that one must distinguish 
between appearances and perceived objects. Khenpo Gangshar Rin­
poche considered this instruction very important. He said that not 
distinguishing between appearances and perceived objects can create 
a lot of problems. As the Great Omniscient One, Longchenpa, said: 
Ignorant people claim that everything is mind. 
They are deluded about the three types of appearance, 
Have many shortcomings, mix things up and overexaggerate. 
Meditators, give up such unwholesome ways! 
Foolish, ignorant people might claim that everything is mind, but 
they are totally deluded about the nature of the three types of appear­
ances: appearances, the feelings and experiences we have in our mind; 
perceived objects, the forms, sounds, scents, tastes, and touches that 
appear as external objects; and the perceiver, our own mind. If we do 
not distinguish among these, we will be deluded. Saying that all of 
these are just mind creates a lot of problems: you will mix everything 
up or overexaggerate. There are many absurd consequences that arise 
out of this, so it is not logically tenable. This is why he says give up 
such unwholesome ways. 
For this reason, we must distinguish between perceived objects 
and appearances. So what are perceived objects? What are appear­
ances? Khenpo Gangshar explains: 
The mere presence of visible forms, sounds, and so forth, 
that are the objects of the six types of consciousness is called 
"perceived objects." 
The mere presence of visible forms means that there is the mere ap­
pearance of forms before the eye. There are also the appearances of 
sounds to the ear, there are scents that appear to the nose, there are 
tastes that appear to the tongue, there are touches that appear to the 
body, and there are all the dharmas the mind can think o£ These 
are the objects of the six consciousnesses. Each of the different facul­
ties and consciousnesses has its own object, the mere appearance of 
which is the perceived object: when it seems as if there is a visual 
APPEARANCES AND MIND 
form, an audible sound, or another object of the six consciousnesses, 
that object is what we call the perceived object. 
Thoughts of attachment, anger, or delusion based on the 
"perceived objects" are "appearances," for example, the feel­
ing of attachment to a pleasant object, the feeling of anger 
toward an unpleasant one and the indifferent feeling to­
ward something neutral. You must understand that such 
appearances are the functions of your own mind. 
When an object appears, if it is something pleasant, we think it is 
nice. Then we want it and get attached to it. Or perhaps we see some­
thing unpleasant and think it is no good-we do not want it. We 
feel aversion to it. Sometimes we perceive something that is neither 
pleasant nor unpleasant. We do not think of it as good, nor do we 
think of it as bad. We neither like nor dislike it; we just experience in­
difference or delusion-we do not really know it. These thoughts of 
attachment, aversion, or delusion that arise based upon the perceived 
object are what we here call appearances. 
But where do these thoughts occur? They occur in our mind­
they are not present in the external objects themselves. They are just 
thoughts, merely a function of the mind. If we put the perceived ob­
jects aside for a moment, it is clear that when we dislike something 
that we have perceived, that is just mind. When happiness occurs, it 
occurs in the mind. When the affliction of aversion occurs, it occurs in 
the mind. When anger occurs, it occurs in the mind. The three differ­
ent types of thoughts-attachment, aversion, and delusion-are not 
present in external objects; they are in the mind. Whatever various 
feelings we have arise in the mind. Such thoughts are appearances. 
CoNscwusNESSES AND THEIR OBJECTS 
The Third Karmapa Rangjung Dorje taught that our mind has eight 
different consciousnesses, of which six engage external objects. These 
six consciousnesses are either conceptual or nonconceptual. The 
nonconceptual consciousnesses include the eye consciousness which 
THE ANALYTIC MEDITATION OF A PANDITA 
sees forms; the ear consciousness which hears sounds by engaging 
audible objects; the nose consciousness which smells scents, whether 
pleasant or unpleasant; the tongue consciousness which tastes flavors 
both good and bad; and the body consciousness which feels touches 
that are soft, rough, and so forth. These five are known as the five 
consciousnesses of the five gates, as they are supported by the five 
faculties of the eyes, ears, nose, tongue, and body, and actually engage 
the external objects of form, sound, scent, taste, and touch. They ex­
perience their objects through direct perception. 
When we talk about the six consciousnesses, we add the sixth, 
mental consciousness to these five. The sixth, mental consciousness 
does not have a material faculty. Our thoughts can think anything at 
all. Sometimes they follow an eye consciousness automatically~ some­
times they follow an ear consciousness, or sometimes they follow a 
nose consciousness, or another sense consciousness. Thoughts do not 
engage the external object directly; instead they engage a meaning 
generality, a conceptual idea of the object in the mind, and think 
many things, such as "This is good" or "That is bad." This is why the 
sixth consciousness is considered a conceptual consciousness. Some­
times it experiences excitement, and sometimes it experiences de­
pression. The one who does all these jobs is the conceptual mental 
COOSClOUSness. 
In the Treasure ofValid Logic, Sakya Pandita writes: 
Sense consciousnesses are like mutes with eyes, 
While thoughts are blind but talkative. 
Self-awareness has all its faculties 
And conveys meaning to the two. 
Sense consciousnesses can't really say anything, nor do they know 
how to think of anything as good or bad. For example, when the eye 
consciousness sees form, it sees blue, yellow, red, white, or whatever 
other color, but it does not really have the thought, "This is blue," or 
"That is white." In contrast, the sixth, mental consciousness is like a lo­
quacious blind person. It does not actually see forms or hear sounds, 
but it thinks within itself about good, bad, yesterday, or today. When 
the eye sees something, for example, it can't see yesterday, nor can it 
86 
APPEARANCES AND MIND 
see tomorrow. It only sees what is right in front of it today. But the 
sixth, mental consciousness is different because it can think, "I went 
there yesterday" or "I'm going to that place tomorrow." 
There is no real connection between the nonconceptual conscious­
nesses such as the eye consciousness and the sixth, mental conscious­
ness. The mute who can see perceives things but cannot say much 
about them. A blind talker can speak, but cannot see. It does not 
know what is right in front of it. They are not connected, but there 
is self-awareness. When we say that the mind is self-aware, this means 
that we know what we are aware o£ Self-awareness knows whatever 
the eye sees. Self-awareness knows whatever the sixth consciousness 
is thinking o£ Whatever the mute eye consciousness sees works as a 
sign, which self-awareness knows. It is as if self-awareness goes and 
talks to the loquacious blind sixth consciousness, and the three work 
things out. That's how the mind works. 
This text discusses only the six consciousnesses, but fundamentally 
there are eight consciousnesses. The six consciousnesses are unstable 
consciousness, like waves in the ocean. Sometimes there is an eye 
consciousness, or sometimes an ear, nose, or other consciousness. 
Thoughts occur in the mind; we see forms and hear sounds. Vari­
ous things occur, but they are changing. The six consciousnesses are 
changeable. 
The stable consciousnesses are said to be the afflicted mind and the 
all-ground consciousness. When we say "all-ground consciousness," 
this means the root of all consciousnesses. Whether we are looking 
with our eyes or not, whether thoughts are occurring in the mind or 
not, the mere clarity of mind is never interrupted. This is what we 
call the all-ground consciousness, the origin of all our cognitions. 
For example, whether there are waves in the ocean or not, the water 
never changes. The ocean is always there. Sometimes there are strong 
waves, sometimes it is calm and placid, but there is not much differ­
ence; the water is still water. The wave-like six consciousnesses do 
sometimes arise, but the nature of the mind is still the nature of the 
mind. Whether we are sleeping, working during the day, having a 
conversation, or doing nothing at all, the ground consciousness is 
always present. 
THE ANALYTIC MEDITATION OF A PANDITA 
As one aspect of the eighth consciousness there is afflicted mind, 
the seventh consciousness. In the ground consciousness, there is 
subtle attachment-a stable, continuously present conception of self 
that makes a distinction between self and other. This is the afflicted 
mind. Although it is not actually a strong affliction in itself, it is the 
root of the afflictions, which is why it is called the afflicted mind. This 
is present in all sentient beings until they reach the seventh bodhi­
sattva level. Beings abandon this consciousness once they attain the 
seventh bodhisattva level. 
When we distinguish appearances and the perceived object, the 
objects of the five gate consciousnesses are perceived objects. The 
object of the sixth consciousness is appearances. The five sensory 
consciousnesses experience attractive and unattractive objects, but 
the sixth, mental consciousness experiences greed for attractive ob­
jects, aversion to unattractive objects, and delusion regarding neutral 
objects. 
Since the five sense consciousnesses are nonconceptual, they do not 
experience much greed for attractive objects, nor do they experience 
much aversion toward unattractive objects. They are like cameras. If 
you take a picture of something nice with a camera, the picture stays 
in the camera, but the camera does not really think of it as being nice. 
If you take a picture of something ugly, the camera does not think 
of it as ugly. Similarly, the five sense consciousnesses of the eye, ear, 
nose, tongue, and body do not have any thought of good or bad. They 
just perceive. 
The one who experiences greed for attractive objects, aversion 
toward unattractive objects, and delusion regarding neutral objects 
is the sixth, mental consciousness. When the eye sees a beautiful 
form, the sixth, mental consciousness thinks of it as good and pro­
duces greed. When it sees something unattractive, it thinks of it as 
bad and produces aversion. When we say it experiences delusion in 
relation to a neutral object, there is no coarse thought that is delu­
sion, but it does not really know that this is an appearance in the 
mind or that that appearances are empty. Its essence is delusion. The 
thoughts of greed, aversion, and delusion that are like loquacious 
blind people toward the meaning generalities that appear in the 
88 
APPEARANCES AND MIND 
sixth, mental consciousness are just mind. They do not actually see 
the external object. 
Which consciousnesses do we use when we meditate? We do not 
meditate with the five sense consciousnesses. The five sense con­
sciousness just perceive whatever appears to them, but there's noth­
ing really there to meditate on. It's all emptiness, but there's no need 
to meditate on them. What needs to meditate is the sixth, mental 
consciousness. Because that is what can think of anything at all, we 
meditate with the sixth, mental consciousness. 
The story of Nyama Paldarbum &om The Hundred Thousand Songs 
of Milarepa explains how to meditate very clearly. When Paldarbum 
met Milarepa, she asked many questions- Where do you come from? 
Where are you going? How do you meditate? Who is your lama? Mila­
repa replied to each of her questions with a song. Paldarbum felt 
great faith and invited Milarepa to her home. When they got there, 
Paldarbum asked, "In the night time, I have to sleep, and in the day 
time I have. to work. From morning till night I chase after food and 
clothing. I need to practice the Dharma and reach buddhahood. Just 
giving up isn't any good. Please teach me the Dharma that will bring 
me to buddhahood." 
Milarepa responded with a song that taught five points through 
fouJ;" analogies. One of the analogies is of the ocean: 
Take the great ocean as an example, 
And meditate without ups or downs. 
Take your own mind as the object, 
And meditate without suspicions. 
Milarepa is saying that you should look at the ocean and see what 
it is like when there are no ups and downs of waves. Your medita­
tion should be like the ocean with no waves. As in that analogy, you 
should look at your own mind and not have many thoughts or sus­
picions. As I mentioned above, the sixth, mental consciousness feels 
greed for attractive things, aversion to unattractive things, and delu­
sion about neutral things. Free of those, you should meditate calmly 
and placidly within the ground .consciousness. 
Nyama Paldarbum replied: 
THE ANALYTIC MEDITATION OF A PANDITA 
It's easy to meditate on the ocean, 
But not so easy to meditate on waves. 
Now tell me how to meditate on waves. 
It's easy to meditate on my own mind, 
But not so easy to meditate on thoughts. 
Now tell me how to meditate on thoughts. 
Milarepa answered: 
If it's easy to meditate on the ocean, 
Waves are the magic of the ocean. 
Rest in the nature of the ocean itself. 
If it's easy to meditate on your own mind, 
Thoughts are the magic of the mind. 
Rest in the nature of mind-essence itself. 
Thoughts are just displays of the mind. They may be waves stirring 
up the all-ground consciousness, but this is not a fault. If you just rest 
loosely in them, they will disappear right there. This is why when we 
meditate we should let the thoughts that occur in the sixth, mental 
consciousness relax into the all-ground consciousness. 
ExPERIENCING APPEARANCES AS MIND 
Here we have identified perceived objects and appearances. Perceived 
objects are external things such as form and sound, and appearances 
are the thoughts, afflictions, and feelings that appear internally in 
our mind. These two are different, and we need to distinguish be­
tween them. 
Perceived objects, such as form, sound, and so forth, have 
appeared due to mind, but they are not mind-they are the 
shared appearances of sentient beings and do not possess 
any true existence, besides being phenomena of dependent 
origination. 
The perceived objects of external form, sound, and so forth naturally 
appear due to the power of our mind, but they are not themselves 
actually mind. Instead, these appearances are shared by many sen-
APPEARANCES AND MIND 
tient beings and occur through interdependence. They appear while 
at the same time being empty. There is nothing about them that can 
be truly established; there is no solid thing that can be proven to 
truly exist. They just naturally appear through interdependence as 
the common experience of sentient beings. 
For example, think of the river Ganges. It is not mind; it is water. 
You might go there some morning at dawn, rent a boat, and glide 
lazily up and down the river. It is nice, peaceful, and lovely, and you 
feel happy. That happiness is mind. Or you might see raw sewage and 
corpses floating in the river, and feel disgusted and depressed. That 
depression is mind. This is the distinction. The river Ganges is the 
perceived object. The feelings of happiness and depression are ap­
pearances. So perceived objects are not mind, but appearances are. 
It is easy to understand that appearances-thoughts, feelings, and 
so forth-are mind. When we feel pleasure, that is obviously mind, 
and when we feel something that is not pleasure, such as aversion, 
that is clearly mind. It is easy to see that thoughts and feelings of plea­
sure or pain are mind. This is very easy to know and prove logically. 
It is very easy to meditate upon this. 
However, when we consider external objects, it is more difficult. 
We could prove that external objects are mind through the reason­
ing of the mind-only school. We can use examples of dreams and so 
forth to come to understand that things are mind. In this respect it is 
easy to understand intellectually through study. But to really have an 
experience of it is much more difficult. We might think everything 
out there is mind, but taking it as the path of direct perception and 
directly meditating on it is very difficult. That is why this teaching 
differentiates between appearances-thoughts and feelings-and 
perceived objects. What this teaches is that the perceived object is not 
mind, but perceptions are. 
The Ninth Karmapa's teachings in Pointing Out the Dharmakaya 
have five sections on the view. These are viewing the mind in stillness, 
viewing the mind in motion, viewing the mind in relation to appear­
ances, viewing whether the moving and still minds are the same or 
different, and viewing whether mind and body are the same or dif­
ferent. There are these five different sections. Of these five different 
91 
THE ANALYTIC MEDITATION OF A PANDITA 
sections, people generally say that viewing the mind in stillness is 
the easiest. It is easy to contemplate, it is easy to meditate upon, and 
it is easy to gain an experience of it. Viewing the mind in motion is 
also pretty easy, but viewing the mind in relation to appearances is 
difficult in all respects: it is difficult to understand, it is difficult to 
meditate upon, and it is difficult to gain any experience of it. 
Why is it so hard to experience external things as mind? It is be­
cause when an external object appears, it appears pretty much the 
same way whether there are five people looking at it, or six, or seven, 
or eight people looking at it. Everyone who looks at one object will 
say it is more or less the same sort of thing. We all think we are look­
ing at the one, same thing, and this one thing does not seem like 
mind at all. We have a habitual tendency not to see it as mind, so it is 
not easy to meditate on it as mind. Many people tell me that meditat­
ing on external things as mind is very difficult. Some people might 
say that it is not so hard, but often they are speaking out of intellec­
tual understanding, not experience. 
Because of our habitual tendencies, when several people look at 
a single thing such as a table, they will all say that there is one table 
there. He sees it; she sees it; I see it. We all see the same table. But 
if we examine it, the actual appearance is different in each of our 
minds. It is not really out there. For example, if you have five televi­
sions tuned to same channel, when you look at them, they all look 
exactly the same. They are all showing the same scenery, the same 
interior of the house, the same person is walking across it, and we 
would say that the televisions are all showing the same thing. But are 
they really the same thing? They are not-one is over here, and one is 
over there. They are not the same. Similarly, many people might see 
a single thing, but the image of that thing that appears to me does 
not appear to someone else. What appears to someone else does not 
appear to me. That is why we sometimes have to ask others, "Hey, 
did you see that?" If we all saw the same appearances we would not 
have to ask-if I saw it, you must have seen it, too. But that is not 
how it is. This is why everything we see is mind. 
However, in order to make it easy to understand, these instructions 
do not explain it in this way. These instructions say that perceived 
APPEARANCES AND MIND 
objects are not mind, but that the feelings, thoughts, and things that 
arise in our mind are. When these instructions say that appearances 
are mind, they mean the latter-the feelings and thoughts. 
While the presentations in mahamudra teachings and Khenpo 
Gangshar's instructions might seem contradictory, the two ap­
proaches are actually very similar. What is most important in the 
mahamudra instructions is that they are mind instructions: they tell 
us how to look at our mind, see what it is like, and see where it is. The 
instructions on dzogchen also give mind instructions, telling us how 
to look at the mind and see what it is like. In both the mahamudra 
and dzogchen traditions, what is most important is meditating on 
the mind, and both explain the reasons why we should meditate 
on the mind and the benefits of doing so. 
93 
7 
LOOKING AT THE MIND 
THE MIND IS THE ROOT of everything, but what is it like? Does 
the mind exist or not? Is it something, or nothing? Often we ex­
amine things ·like this with logical inference as in middle-way phi-
losophy, but these instructions teach a different way to examine and 
analyze the mind. In the middle way, we examine it through logic 
and inference: we think that something must be so or not so. It is as if 
we were circling the mind from afar. Here, in the mind instructions, 
we do not examine the mind from afar with logical analysis. We in­
stead look directly at it and take direct perception as the path. If there 
is a mind that exists, where is it? Is it in our head? Is it in our body? Is 
it something that is outside our body? We need to actually search for 
it, just looking, without using logic. We should not ask, what is it like 
and what proves it? In this way, the analytic meditation of a pandita 
differs from middle-way logic. 
In the middle way, there are different types of reasoning, including 
logic that analyzes causes, logic that analyzes results, and analyses of 
the essence of phenomena, but the primary logic of the middle way is 
the logic of analyzing interdependence. This was the main line of rea­
soning taught by the noble Nagarjuna in his Fundamental Wisdom of 
the Middle Way. In the context of this logic, interdependence does not 
refer to the twelve links of interdependence. Instead, what it means is 
that any one thing arises in dependence upon something else. This is 
something we can examine logically. As Nagarjuna says: 
94 
LOOKING AT THE MIND 
Because there is no dharma at all 
That is not interdependent, 
Therefore there is no dharma at all 
That is not emptiness. 
There is nothing other than interdependence, and since there is only 
interdependence, there are no things that are not empty. 
I often demonstrate this with the example of incense sticks. If you 
have two sticks of incense, one of which is two inches and the· other 
six, you would have to say that the six-inch stick is long and the two­
inch stick is short. Everyone will agree that the two-inch stick is short, 
not long, and that the six-inch stick is long, not short. But if you com­
pare the six-inch stick to a twelve-inch stick, then suddenly it has 
become short. Whether something is short or long depends on what 
you compare it with. In this way, there is no long or short-long and 
short are empty. Similarly, there is no big or small, no good or bad, 
and no here or there. All of these are just labels given in relation 
to one another; they cannot be truly established and therefore they 
are empty. . 
When we think like this, we can know that there is no such thing 
as long and understand that long is empty. But this does not come 
from experience; it comes from understanding. We have an under­
standing that things are probably empty and they probably do not 
truly exist. If we meditate on this understanding for a long time, we 
can develop certainty in it, and then we continue to meditate on that. 
This is a long and slow process; it takes a long time to arrive at actual 
realization-we cannot realize the dharma nature quickly. This is 
why the Buddha taught in the sutras that it takes three uncountable 
aeons of gathering merit before we can reach enlightenment. It is a 
long and slow process of first developing an understanding of empti­
ness, meditating, and developing certainty. Then we meditate as we 
gather merit, but we cannot develop this quickly. 
In the secret mantra vajrayana, however, it is said that we can attain 
the state of unified Vajradhara in one lifetime and one body. How 
can that be possible if the sutras say it takes three uncountable aeons? 
95 
THE ANALYTIC MEDITATION OF A PANDITA 
If you follow the path of the sutras, it does take three uncountable 
aeons, but if you take a different path -the path of the secret mantra 
vajrayana-it is possible to achieve the ultimate result in one lifetime 
and one body. The difference is that we do not just take logic and 
inference as the path; we do it through experience. We look to see 
where our mind is and what it is like. When we do this we see that 
the mind is naturally empty of any essence. The mind seems to be 
something, but when we look for it, we cannot find it either inside or 
outside our bodies. We should not merely analyze it; we must look at 
it directly and experience it. When we experience it, we do not need 
to prove that it is emptiness through reasoning, we simply have the 
feeling that it is emptiness. 
The meditation practices of the middle way and the analytic medi­
tation of the pandita both come to the same fundamental point, but 
they do so by different methods. In the middle way, one does this by 
engaging one's understanding and examining external phenomena 
conceptually. This can bring us to the understanding that everything 
is emptiness, but meditating on that does not really lead to actual 
experience. In the meditations of the pandita and the kusulu, how­
ever, we do not look at external things conceptually but instead look 
inward at our own internal experience. 
We can think of this through an analogy-the distinction is like 
the difference between the methods of historians and archaeologists. 
A historian wiil read all the history books and might perhaps know 
that the Buddha came to Sarnath in northern India and turned the 
wheel of Dharma. They will have the feeling they know this, but they 
do not have any actual experience of it. The archaeologist will ac­
tually go to Sarnath, dig in the ground, and find all sorts of signs 
and indications. They will look at a stone here, an ornament there, 
and an inscription here. When they dig through it all, they find the 
Ashoka pillar and see all the writing on it, which they then read and 
see that it says that this is the place where the Buddha first turned the 
wheel of Dharma. After they do this, they think to themselves, "Wow! 
This really is the place where the Lord Buddha taught the Dharma!" 
In addition to an understanding and conceptual certainty, they also 
have a concrete experience. 
LOOKING AT THE MIND 
Similarly, when we meditate we don't merely think that every­
thing is emptiness. Rather, we look and see what the mind is like. 
Where is it? Where does it dwell? Where does it go? What is its es­
sence? When we look carefully, we can have an experience where 
we feel that the nature of mind really is like that. It really is empty. 
That is why we do the analytic meditation of the pandita. 
LOOKING FOR THE MIND IN THE BODY 
Khenpo Gangshar begins the actual instructions on how to do the 
analytic meditation of a pandita by saying: 
You should now examine where this mind dwells: from the 
top of the hair on your head to the nails on your toes; from 
the outer layer of skin, the flesh in between, to the bones, 
five organs, and six vessels within. 
We have a mind that seems strong and powerful. We think that there 
is a mind, and that it is the root of all appearances-but where is it? 
How does it exist? We think that our sixth, mental consciousness, our 
mind that can think of anything at all and has the essence of greed, 
aversion, and delusion is something that exists somewhere. We need 
to look carefully to see where it is. 
We first look for the mind in our body. We start from our head­
the tips of our hair, the middle of the hair, the roots, the skin of the 
scalp. Is our mind there? Is it in our skull? Is it in the brain within 
the skull? Is it someplace in our neck or spinal column? We look 
throughout our entire body from our head through our torso to our 
legs, feet, toes, toenails, and out to the very tips of our toenails to 
see if we can find our mind. If our mind were something that ex­
isted, there would have to be someplace we could point to and say, 
"This is where my mind is!" It would have a shape and a color, and 
we could say, "It is such and such a color and has such and such a 
shape." But when we look, we cannot see it anywhere. We can look 
out our skin on the outside, the flesh in the middle, and the marrow 
of our bones to see where the mind is, but we cannot find it. We 
do not examine this with logic. Instead, we actually look. If we use 
97 
THE ANALYTIC MEDITATION OF A PANDITA 
logic, we will come to an understanding of it, but that is not what we 
are doing here. Here we are looking at it directly. We should be like 
zoologists studying birds in the wild. When scientists study birds, 
they go outside and watch: Where did the bird fly to? When did the 
bird go? What does the bird eat? When does the bird leave its nest 
in the morning? When does it come back to its nest in the evening? 
These scientists actually look and see for themselves what the bird 
does. We need to be like them: we need to look at our mind and we 
need to see-Where is the mind? Is the mind in our feet? Is it in our 
head? Where is it? What is it like? Is it inside or outside? We need to 
look and see for ourselves. 
When investigating the dwelling place of mind, most Chi­
nese will claim that it abides in the head. Tibetans will 
say that it dwells in the heart. Neither one is sure because 
when you touch the top of the head the mind seems to leap 
there and when you touch the soles of the feet it seems to 
jump there. 
When Khenpo Gangshar gave these instructions, he often taught 
them to Tibetans, but he also sometimes taught them to Chinese. 
When he asked them where the mind was, they would give differ­
ent answers. The Chinese at that time had received some scientific 
education and would answer that the mind is in the brain or the 
head. Tibetans, however, would say it is in the heart because that is 
the center of the body. Although they would feel this and say this, 
neither is true. It is not really in either place because if you look for 
exactly where it is, you cannot find it. It is not really in the head or 
the brain. Perhaps since thoughts occur through the support of the 
channels within the brain, the brain may be a basis for the mind, but 
the brain is not the mind itself. It is material. When a person dies, the 
brain is still there, but the mind is not. Thus the mind is not in the 
brain. Similarly, it is not really in the heart, because it seems as if it 
were present in the whole body and not concentrated in the center. 
We have both mind and thoughts. In the abhidharma, mind, or 
cognition, is considered the aggregate of consciousness, but thoughts 
are categorized under the aggregate of formations. Within the aggre-
LOOKING AT THE MIND 
gate of formations, there are fifty-one different formations. In our 
Buddhist instructions, we generally say that such thoughts are in the 
brain. The reason comes from the meditation on the peaceful and 
wrathful deities. In their pure form, there are the forty-two peaceful 
deities, but in their impure form they are the eight consciousnesses, 
which are present at the center of the body, in the hean. This is why 
we meditate on the peaceful deities such as Vairochana and the rest 
of the five dhyani buddhas as well as the five female buddhas and 
so fonh in the heart. In terms of thoughts, there are the fifty-one 
formations: feeling, conception, virtuous thoughts (virtuous mental 
factors), unvirtuous thoughts (unvirtuous mental factors), strong af­
flictions, minor afflictions, and also changeable mental factors. These 
occur in the brain because the brain provides the conditions for them 
to occur. In the practice of the peaceful and wrathful deities, we med­
itate on the fifty-one bloodthirsty, wrathful deities in the brain. Thus 
the cause for the fifty-one mental factors is most likely in the brain, 
but cognition, which is essentially clear awareness that can go any­
where, is not necessarily located there. 
So the mind is not necessarily in either the brain or the hean. As 
Khenpo Gangshar says, when you feel something or think about 
something, the mind jumps there. If you have a sensation in your 
head, your mind leaps there. When you touch the soles of your feet, 
the mind jumps there. If you wiggle your finger, then at that point 
the mind seems to be in the finger, but if you do something else, the 
mind goes elsewhere. The mind seems to be throughout the body, 
but exactly where is uncertain-it does not dwell in any fixed loca­
tion. The mind seems to go wherever you experience a sensation, so 
you cannot say with certainty that it is in either the head or the heart. 
This is looking inside the body. 
INVESTIGATING WHERE THE MIND DWELLS 
We cannot find any place inside the body where the mind dwells, so 
we might think that the mind dwells in external objects-the forms 
we see, sounds we hear, scents we smell, and so forth. So we need to 
look and see whether the mind actually resides in them. Does the 
99 
THE ANALYTIC MEDITATION OF A PANDITA 
mind somehow exit the body and reside in the object? When we ex­
amine this, although we see and hear things, we cannot find that the 
mind dwells in external objects. As Khenpo Gangshar says: 
It has no fixed place. It dwells neither inside outer objects 
nor inside the body, nor in the empty space in between. You 
must become certain that it has no dwelling place. 
Sometimes it seems as if the mind is outside someplace. We see 
all these things outside. We see mountains or we hear echoes off of 
cliffs. We have all these different thoughts of different places, and the 
mind seems to go to those places when we think about them. But 
it only seems that way; the mind is not really outside of us either. It 
dwells neither in external objects nor someplace in the body-we 
cannot find any place in the body where it is. You might then think 
that since it is not in the body and it is not outside the body, it must 
be in the empty space in between. But if you look, you cannot find it. 
We need to look and become certain that the mind has no dwelling 
place-we must be certain that there is no real place that we can we 
can point to and say, "Aha! That's where it is!" 
Khenpo Gangshar continues: 
If your mind has a dwelling place, what are the outer, inner, 
and middle aspects of this dwelling place? Is it identical 
with or different from the dweller? 
If they are identical-since there is increase or decrease, 
change and alteration in outer objects and within the 
body-your mind will change in the very same way. So it 
is illogical to think they are identical. 
If they are different, then is the essence of this different 
mind something that exists or not? If it is, then it should 
at least have a shape and color. Since there is no shape 
or color, it does not unilaterally exist. However, since this 
"Ever-conscious and Ever-aware King" is unceasing, it does 
not unilaterally not exist. 
If your mind were to have a dwelling place, what would it be like? Is 
it the same as the mind, or different? If it were the same, since exter-
roo 
LOOKING AT THE MIND 
nal objects change, the mind would have to change in the same way. 
External things get bigger or smaller. They change in various ways. If 
they were the same as the mind, then the mind would get bigger or 
smaller, or change in the same ways. Also, sometimes that outside ob­
ject is there, but sometimes it is not. If the mind were the same as the 
object, it would follow that when the object is there the mind would 
also be present, but when the object is not there, the mind would be 
absent. So it is illogical to think that they are identical. But if the mind 
and the object are different, is the essence of this different mind some­
thing that exists, or not? If so, we should be able to say, "This is what 
the mind is. This is where it dwells." The mind that dwells somewhere 
should have a color and shape of some sort. But it has none, so we 
cannot say that it really exists. 
NEITHER SoMETHING NOR NoTHING: 
THE EMPTINESS OF THE MIND 
If our mind were something that existed, there would have to be some 
place that it stayed and there would have to be something that stayed 
there. We would be able to say, "That is where it is! The essence of my 
mind is this! My mind is staying here." There would be something 
we could find and point to, but there's nothing like that. We cannot 
say that we see our mind in some particular place. We can't say any­
thing like that. If it were some existing thing, it would have color and 
shape, or there would have to be some identifiable thing that does 
not have shape or color. We cannot find any thing with a shape or any 
thing with a color, and if we look for a thing that has neither shape 
nor color, we cannot find such a thing anywhere. 
Our mind is our own, so if there were something to find we should 
be able to find it, but we cannot. When we look for our hand, for ex­
ample, we can point to our hand and say, "This is my hand. See, these 
are my five fingers." But our mind is not like that. If we look to see 
if it is outside the body, inside, in our feet, in our head, or anywhere 
else, we cannot find anything at all. It is as if the mind were not there, 
as if it did not exist. When we look for our mind and cannot find 
it, it is not because we do not know how to look. It is not because 
101 
THE ANALYTIC MEDITATION OF A PANDITA 
we are incapable of looking for our mind. We have a mind that can 
think anything at all, so where is it? It is the root of all our actions, 
good and ill. But we cannot find the mind, because its essence is 
naturally empty. 
This is why the sutras teach outer emptiness, inner emptiness, outer 
and inner emptiness, and so forth. The mind is not far away. The emp­
tiness of our mind means that we cannot find the mind anywhere at 
all, and this is also what the sutras teach. It is similar with the mid­
dle way: we could use logic and reasoning to prove that the mind is 
emptiness, but when we look at it, we realize that the lack of any­
thing to find is what the middle way means by emptiness. For this 
reason, the mind is empty. This is what we discover when we look at 
it from the perspective of emptiness. 
When we say that appearances are mind and the mind is empty, 
this means that it is as if the mind did not exist. We are not merely 
proving it through scriptural citations or logic. We actually have to 
experience it: we have to look at it. We have to see: What is it like? 
When we look, what do we see? We cannot see or find anything. That 
is what it means to say the mind is empty. 
But the emptiness is spontaneously present. We cannot really say 
the mind is nothing. It is not as if the mind cannot see or feel any­
thing; it is not as if it cannot do anything. It is not just a blank noth­
ingness. There is the potential for all sorts of appearances to arise. 
There is the capacity for qualities and wisdom to arise. This is what 
we call the spontaneous presence of emptiness. It is what Khenpo 
Gangshar calls the "ever-conscious and ever-aware king." The mind 
is able to know anything, see anything, feel anything, and experience 
anything. It can know and be aware of anything-it is as strong and 
powerful as a king. 
This mind that understands, remembers the past, and thinks, is 
unceasing. It never stops. It is present, even though we cannot find it. 
Does this mean it is something? It does not, because it is empty-we 
cannot find it. But that does not mean that it is nothing, a blank void. 
It can understand anything. It can think, engage in conversation, and 
do anything. It is unceasing. If we did not have a mind, our body 
would be little more than a corpse. But it is not like that. We can do 
102 
LOOKING AT THE MIND 
things with this body. It is as if the mind did exist. Its essence is not 
something, but it is not nothing either. We look and look, search and 
search, and can't find anything, but there is something that knows 
and is aware. There is something that can see, hear, and know any­
thing, and that is unceasing, so you cannot say that it does not exist 
at all. 
This is why many scholars cite this verse: 
While this appearance is not established appearance, 
It has no basis and no root. 
While this emptiness is not established emptiness 
Interdependence occurs unceasingly. 
When we look at something such as a glass, it is empty-there is 
nothing there that truly exists. But even though it is empty, it appears 
to us. Similarly, the mind thinks, knows, remembers, and does many 
things, but at the same time as it thinks, knows, and remembers, it 
is not there. What is the nature of the mind like? It is not anything. 
But while it is not anything, there is something that sees and knows. 
However, if you look for it while it sees and knows something, there's 
nothing to find. This is the characteristic of the mind. When we expe­
rience this as it is, this is not just a conceptual understanding of what 
it must be like. When we actually experience what the mind is truly 
like, this is what it means to say that appearances are mind, mind is 
empty, and emptiness is spontaneously present. 
We also say that this spontaneous presence is self-liberated. Nor­
mally we are confused by the appearances we perceive, but when we 
realize the spontaneous presence of emptiness, we are no longer con­
fused by appearances. We naturally realize that they dwell within the 
nature of emptiness and there is no longer anything about them that 
can bind us to either samsara or conceptual thoughts. 
Should we think the mind is empty and meditate on that? That 
is not what we should do. You might think that the mind that can 
think and remembers anything is unceasing, so we need to meditate 
on that. But that is not necessary, either. Instead, we simply need to 
look at the mind and see it as it is: essentially empty, but unceasingly 
thinking and aware. This is the characteristic of the mind. We do 
103 
THE ANALYTIC MEDITATION OF A PANDITA 
not need to meditate thinking that nothingness is something, or that 
something is nothing. Instead, we just need to know its essence. This 
should not just be a mental understanding; it is important that we 
know the nature of the mind as it is. 
The Third Karmapa, Rangjung Dorje, described this in his "Aspira-
tion Prayer of Mahamudra": 
Not something, even the victors cannot see it. 
Not nothing, it is the ground of all samsara and nirvana. 
This is not a contradiction; it is unity, the middle way. 
May we realize the mind's nature, beyond extremes. 
When we look to see where the essence of our mind is, there is noth­
ing we can see or locate. There is no color, no shape, and nothing to 
find. It is not something. There's nothing there. It is not that the mind 
is too small and we cannot see it. It is not that it is too pure for us to 
see. It is not that it is too far away for us to see. It is not because we 
are just ignorant and do not know how to look. It is not any of these: 
even the victors-the wise and omniscient buddhas-cannot see or 
find anything about the nature of the mind that can be established as 
a thing. The mind is not something that exists in any way. Just as there 
is nothing we can see, there is nothing the buddhas can see either. 
This is because the nature of mind is emptiness. 
For example, when the Buddha taught emptiness, he taught about 
many different kinds of emptiness: outer emptiness, inner emptiness, 
outer and inner emptiness, and so forth. Even the victorious buddhas 
cannot see these. The reason they cannot see them is not because the 
buddhas lack knowledge or intelligence; it is because the essence of 
those emptinesses itself is empty. 
Normally we think that if a thing is empty, it must be nothing­
ness-a blank void, nothing at all. We think of it as being like the 
inanimate void of empty space. But if we look at the mind and ask 
ourselves if it is nothing, it is not. As Rangjung Dorje says in the 
second line of the stanza cited above, "Not nothing, it is the ground 
of all samsara and nirvana." It is the root of everything. When we 
wander in samsara, see the appearances of the six classes of samsara, 
experience suffering and afflictions, and have problems and difficul-
104 
LOOKING AT THE MIND 
ties, all of it happens on the basis of our mind. When we free our­
selves of the suffering of samsara and achieve nirvana, the ground for 
the wisdom of the buddhas and their activity for the sake of sentient 
beings is also just this mind. For that reason, the mind is not unilater­
ally nothing. If it were, we would become like corpses or rocks, but 
we do not. Wandering in samsara is just a projection of the mind. 
Achieving buddhahood as well is just what happens when the nature 
of the mind becomes manifest as it is. The basis of both samsara and 
nirvana is the mind, so the mind is not nothing. 
So when Rangjung Dorje says "Not something, it is not seen even 
by the buddhas," it means the same thing as when Khenpo Gangshar 
says that if mind exists, "then it should at least have a shape and color. 
Since there is no shape or color, it does not unilaterally exist." When 
Rangjung Dorje says, "Not nothing, it is the ground of all samsara and 
nirvana," it means the same as when Khenpo Gangshar says, "How­
ever, since this 'Ever-conscious and Ever-aware King' is unceasing, it 
does not unilaterally not exist." These both teach what the essence of 
our mind is like. 
This might sound like a contradiction. If we are scholars studying 
logically, we think that a phenomenon has to be either something or 
nothing; it cannot be both. If it is not something, it must be noth­
ing. If it is not nothing, it must be something. These are mutually 
exclusive and there can be no third alternative. There is no other way 
that it can be. But actually, when we look at the nature of the mind, 
not being something and not being nothing are not contradictory. 
Our mind is clear and can know things. But at the same time if we 
look to see where it is, we cannot find it anywhere. Therefore it is 
not something, but it is still knowing, so it cannot be nothing ei­
ther. These two points are not contradictory; they go together. Even 
though it does not exist, the mind knows, sees, and understands-it 
is the all-knowing, all-aware king. Still, we cannot find it. These two 
are brought together and unified; this is the great middle way. 
When we engage in logical analysis, we often present the dharma 
expanse or emptiness as having the characteristic of being neither 
something nor nothing. If we ask what has this characteristic, with­
out needing to analyze and examine, we see that it is present within 
105 
THE ANALYTIC MEDITATION OF A PANDITA 
our minds. The mind is not something and it is not nothing. It dwells 
neither in the extreme of existence nor in the extreme of nonexis­
tence. The middle way of unity is present within our mind. Is this 
something we need to experience from far away? It is not-the nature 
of mind is not far away from us. Nor is it something that we have to 
go through great trials and tribulations to find. It is our mind as it is. 
We do not need to make something into nothing or to make nothing 
into something. The nature of the mind is not something that occurs 
because we meditate. It is not something that only happens when we 
examine it. It is not something that the Buddha or anyone else made 
that way. It is just the way the mind is-its nature. 
106 
8 
A SUMMARY OF THE 
ANALYTIC MEDITATION 
OF A PANDITA 
WE ALL STRIVE TO FIND happiness and avoid suffering. In 
order to find happiness and avoid suffering, we need to be care­
ful about karma, cause, and effect. Karma, cause, and effect function 
through our bodies, speech, and minds, but the most important of 
these is our mind. So we need to know the nature of this mind thor­
oughly. We need to look to see where it is. We need to recognize the 
nature of the mind as it is, without altering it. Just resting in medita­
tion within that is enough. This is how we come to understand the 
way the mind is. 
The explanation up to this point completes the preliminary 
teachings of the analytical meditation of a pandita. 
Of the two main parts of the instructions, the first, the analytic medi­
tation of a pandita, has been completed. When we examine where the 
mind comes from, where it dwells, and where it goes to, we see that 
the mind cannot be established as a truly existing thing. But it is also 
not nothing at all. Many Buddhist philosophical texts give examples 
of things that do not exist in any way, shape, or form, such as rabbit 
horns or flowers that grow in the sky, but the mind-essence is not 
like that. Its essence of being clear wisdom is unceasing and this is 
107 
THE ANALYTIC MEDITATION OF A PANDITA 
something that we can actually experience. We do the analytic medi­
tation of the pandita in order to recognize this. 
If you look on the surface, it seems as if this is probably analyzing 
through logic and inference. But it is not that. Actually, it is looking 
to see where the mind is and experiencing it through direct percep­
tion. But how do we look at it? 
The texts on valid perception teach four different types of direct 
perception. The first is direct sensory perception, such as when we 
actually see with our eyes, actually hear with our ears, actually smell a 
scent with our noses, actually taste a flavor with our tongues, or actu­
ally feel a touch with our bodies. The actual experience of an external 
object through the five sense faculties is what we call direct sensory 
perception. Is the analytic meditation of the pandita direct sensory 
perception? It is not. 
The second is direct mental perception. There is a slight occur­
rence of a nonconceptual mental consciousness that forms a link 
between the sensory consciousnesses and the conceptual mental con­
sciousness. Is this it? This is also not it. Both direct sensory and direct 
mental perception are directed outward at external objects. They do 
not look inward at the internal mind. 
Is the analytic meditation of the pandita self-aware direct percep­
tion? It is not. Self-awareness as described in the texts on validity 
means that the mind is not hidden from itsel£ It does not look out at 
the external object; it looks at the inner mind. But between the un­
confused nature and the confused perceptions, it looks at confused 
perceptions. It is knowing what we see. When we hear something, it 
is knowing that we hear. When we think about something, knowing 
that we think about it is what we call the self-aware direct perception. 
This is not the analytic meditation of the pandita either. 
Well then, when we do the analytic meditation of a pandita and 
examine our mind to see where it comes from, where it dwells, and 
where it goes, what sort of direct perception do we use? We use direct 
yogic perception. Through our samadhi and the intelligence born 
of meditation, we actually experience the way the mind is: neither 
something nor nothing. We do not contrive it through inference, 
through thinking "It is empty." Instead, we experience it directly. It is 
108 
A SUMMARY OF THE ANALYTIC MEDITATION OF A PANDITA 
our own mind, and when we look at the essence of our own mind, 
if it were something, there would be a thing we could find. But we 
don't find anything. Well then, is it nothing at all, like space? It is not. 
Clear awareness is unceasing, and actually directly experiencing this 
essence is the result of the analytic meditation of the pandita. 
This talk of the four types of direct perception generally comes 
up in intellectual discussion on the topic of validity. However, when 
we combine that with our meditation, we see that our insight is not 
direct sensory perception, not self-aware direct perception, and not 
inference. It is direct yogic perception. The nature of the mind is 
something we have to directly experience in meditation; we should 
not let it be stained by inference. If we were to think about it through 
inference, that would not be the right samadhi on the nature of the 
mind. So the discussion of direct yogic perception may be rather in­
tellectual, but it is also very helpful for our meditation. 
109 

PART THREE 
THE RESTING 
MEDITATION OF 
A KUSULU 
THE SECOND PART OF KHENPO GANGSHAR'S INSTRUCTIONS 
is the main practice, the resting meditation of a kusulu. A kusulu is 
someone who leads a very simple, uncomplicated life and does things 
easily and without much effon. Similarly, in the resting meditation of 
a kusulu, we do not go through a lot of effort to do the meditation. It 
is not examining anything thoroughly, it is not studying; we just rest 
simply in equipoise just as it is. This is extremely important. 
The reason is that the realization of the nature of the mind is not 
something that we can find by searching for it from afar. It is present 
within the essence of the mind itsel£ If we do not alter or change that 
in any way, that is enough. It is not as if we were lacking something 
before so we need to make something new through our meditation. 
It is not as if we are bltd and have to go through all sorts of efforts 
to make ourselves good. Goodness is something we all have. It has 
III 
always been present within all of us, but we have just not looked for 
it or seen it yet, so we have become confused. Therefore all we need to 
do is to just rest within it without changing it. We see where it stays 
and rest there, so we are like a kusulu. This means that we rest free 
and easy with nothing to do, very simply. We do not need to think 
that we are making something good or that we need to meditate 
properly. It is enough just to know what we already have. 
Well then, what do we need to do? We just need to recognize the 
way our mind is as it is and then rest in equipoise within that, as it 
is. In the instructions on mahamudra, this is what we call ordinary 
mind. This is just knowing how our mind is and what its essence is 
like, and then resting in equipoise within that. Sometimes we call 
this the natural state, which just means that we do not change it in 
any way. Both of these terms mean that we do not analyze or examine 
too much, nor do we alter things at all. We simply rest in the nature 
of the mind as it is. That is what we call resting meditation. Rest­
ing here means we leave it alone. We don't need to do a lot to it or 
alter it in any way. Just rest in equipoise within its essence, whatever 
that is like. 
II2 
9 
DEVOTION AND 
STABILITY 
WHAT IS THE MOST important thing when we practice medi­
tation? Devotion is most important, as the "Short Vajradhara 
Lineage Prayer" teaches: 
Devotion's the head of medita.tion, as it's taught. 
As ones who pray always to the lama who opens 
The gate to the treasury of oral instructions, 
Please bless us that genuine devotion arise. 
It is crucial for our meditation to have devotion. If our devotion is 
strong, our meditation will also be strong. If our devotion is not so 
strong, our meditation will not be strong either. If we have one hun­
dred percent devo.tion, our meditation will also be one hundred per­
cent. Similarly, if we have fifty percent devotion, we will have only 
fifty percent meditation, and if we only have one percent devotion, 
then we will only have one percent meditation. This is why devotion 
is so important for our practice. 
You might think that the importance of devotion is taught for 
people of lesser capabilities who are not very smart. You might think 
it is blind faith. But that is not the case. If we have strong devo­
tion and conviction in the Dharma, we will be diligent about our 
Dharma practice and be able to do it. Without faith or devotion, we 
will not really be able to practice or to be diligent. Since diligence is 
IIJ 
THE RESTING MEDITATION OF A KUSULU 
so important, it is critical that we have strong devotion and strong 
conviction in the Dharma. 
You might think you ought to have faith in your lama. When you 
see the lama's good qualities, you have faith in them, but sometimes 
you also see faults in the lama, and then how can you have faith? 
Should you pretend that a lama who does not have good qualities 
actually does and then develop faith? Should you pretend that your 
lama has no faults even though you see faults? You should not do 
either of these. It is possible that your lama can have both good quali­
ties and faults. You should not ha~e faith in your lama just because 
they exhibit good behavior, are upstanding, and are a good person. 
You should not have faith in a lama thinking that their faults aren't 
really faults. If your lama has faults, that does not make any differ­
ence. If the lama has good qualities, that is good. But those are not 
the reasons why we should be devoted to our lamas. 
The reason to have devotion to the lama is the Dharma that they 
teach-that is the thing that can bring us to the ultimate results of 
liberation and omniscience. That is what we really need; because of 
that Dharma we will naturally be able to benefit ourselves and others 
spontaneously. This is what is most important, and this is why we 
must have devotion. 
If you read the life story of the great yogi Milarepa, you will see 
what extraordinary faith and devotion he had in his guru, Marpa the 
Translator. Because of his devotion, he was able to take his meditation 
and practice to their ultimate end, through which he attained the su­
preme and ordinary accomplishments. But how did he develop such 
extraordinary faith and devotion? First he realized that Marpa was a 
teacher who had the extraordinary instructions on mahamudra and 
the six yogas that the great Naropa had taught. He had extraordinary 
confidence in these, through which he developed his devotion. He 
saw that Marpa could teach him the Dharma that he needed to help 
himsel£ There were times when Marpa treated him terribly and beat 
him harshly, and it is not as if Milarepa did not feel any pain. It is not 
as if he were always happy. He was often discouraged- he thought 
he would never receive the Dharma instructions he needed. He got 
114 
DEVOTION AND STABILITY 
extremely depressed and cried on many occasions. He even gave up 
and left a few times, thinking he would never receive any Dharma 
teachings. Is this because he lacked faith in Marpa? It is not. He did 
not develop his faith thinking that Marpa was a fine, upstanding, and 
admirable person. What he actually had faith in is that Marpa had 
truly profound Dharma instructions, and that these were the instruc­
tions that could benefit him. This is the level on which he had faith in 
Marpa. He had faith because he knew that if he could do the practice, 
he would be able to attain its results. 
We should not look for a lama who has absolutely no faults and is 
replete with good qualities-we will never find anyone like that. We 
do need to have strong devotion, but the devotion is for the Dharma, 
not the lama's human character. 
This devotion is very important to our meditation-it is the head 
of meditation, it is said. This is actually an excellent metaphor. When 
we think about our Dharma practice, there are two parts: our samadhi 
meditation and devotion. Devotion might seem like something small: 
we spend so much time in meditation that devotion seems insignifi­
cant in comparison. Similarly, the head is tiny in comparison to the 
rest of the human body, so we might think that the head cannot be 
very important. But without this little head, the big body would have 
no mouth and thus would be unable to eat. You would not have 
eyes, so you could not see. You would not have ears, so you could not 
listen to Dharma talks. Without a mouth you could not say a word. 
Thus without this one little thing, your body would be unable to do 
anything. But because you have a head, your body can actually do 
things. It is similar with meditation. Devotion might seem a small 
thing in comparison to the long time spent in meditation, but just as 
the body will not work without a head, your meditation will not go 
anywhere without devotion. If your devotion is strong, our practice 
will be strong. If your devotion is intense and you can practice with 
one hundred percent effort, that is wonderful. If you are not quite 
able to do that, then it is still excellent. But without that intensity of 
devotion you will not be able to practice in such a way as will bring 
you to the final result. 
115 
THE RESTING MEDITATION OF A KUSULU 
Devotion is important to our Dharma practice in general, but it is 
especially imponant for the analytic meditation of the pandita and 
the resting meditation of the kusulu. It is most imponant to know 
that we can do these practices. We need to think, "I can do this. 
I can do this meditation. I can develop real experience." Khenpo 
Gangshar's instructions have exceptional power and blessings that 
we can feel-they are not like other instructions. This is not be­
cause of any qualities on my part; it comes from the qualities and 
blessings of this exceptional lama and his instructions. But whether 
you can experience this depends on your own faith and confidence. 
If you have strong faith and devotion, you will be able to receive 
their blessings. 
Sometimes people think too much: they might look at these 
instructions and think they are so easy that anyone can do them. 
How can anything so easy have such blessings? But if you practice 
with faith and devotion, these instructions will help you. Without 
faith and devotion, however, they will not do much for you. This 
is why faith, devotion, and belief are so imponant for our practice 
in general and crucial for these instructions on the analytic medi­
tation of the pandita and the resting meditation of the kusulu in 
particular. 
TRANQ.!.JILITY MEDITATION 
In general, meditation instructions often teach both tranquility and 
insight meditation. Many presentations teach that one should prac­
tice tranquility meditation first and insight meditation later. But here 
we meditate on the two together. We are taught to meditate on the 
nature of things by looking directly at them. If we can do this, our 
mind will become peaceful and we will naturally develop tranquil­
ity meditation. At the same time, we will also develop the clarity of 
insight. In this way we do not separate tranquility and insight; we 
practice them together. But even though Khenpo Gangshar does not 
teach tranquility meditation explicitly, studying it can help us to de­
velop the stability of our mind, so I think it is helpful to review tran­
quility meditation. 
n6 
DEVOTION AND STABILITY 
I have met many people who have received pointing-out instruc­
tions. Usually, when we receive pointing-out instructions, there is 
some sort of feeling or experience that happens. This is good and fine, 
but it may not be very stable. People who tell me what happened for 
them when they received the pointing-out instructions often say that 
they didn't recognize anything or that they recognized something 
and had some feeling, but it just dissipated. It changed and was not so 
helpful in the end. This is why it is important for us to identify both 
the stability of shamatha and the clarity of insight. Having the cer­
tainty that comes from study and reasoning will also help us develop 
strong meditation. This is why developing some stability through 
tranquility meditation is helpful. 
The Difference between Tranquility and 
Insight Meditation 
You might wonder what the difference between tranquility and in­
sight meditation is. Tranquility meditation is just resting stably. There 
is not necessarily any intelligence present, whether the intelligence 
born of listening, contemplating, or wisdom. We do not really rec­
ognize the mind: we just rest peacefully free of thoughts within the 
empty aspect of the mind. That is tranquility or shamatha meditation. 
But when we know the nature of the mind clearly and thoroughly, 
then it is insight meditation. Insight has clarity. But it is good to have 
stability in our meditation, even if it lacks such clarity. 
In Clarifying the Natural State, Takpo Tashi first teaches that we 
should sit up straight with good posture. Even before we are given 
any instructions on how to work with the mind, if we just sit for a 
few days practicing our posture, the mind will naturally come to rest. 
This will naturally bring out the stability of our minds. 
Five Methods ofTranquility Meditation 
Instructions on tranquility meditation often present two types of 
tranquility meditation: tranquility meditation with and without 
support. But if we leave that discussion aside, there are many other 
II7 
THE RESTING MEDITATION OF A KUSULU 
methods as well, among which are the nine methods for resting the 
mind. The first few are especially helpful for developing tranquility 
meditation, so I will discuss them here. 
RESTING AND CONTINUAL RESTING 
The first of the nine methods for resting the mind is simply called 
resting. Even when there are no thoughts occurring, the mind does 
not become blank, like a rock. There is still clarity that knows, but 
if you can rest for a short period without many thoughts, clear and 
sharp, that is resting. Since we do this meditation for only a short 
time, we have the thought of recognizing it-we think, "This is rest­
ing." This is the first method of resting the mind: just resting. 
We should repeat this several times, just letting the mind rest. In the 
first method, we meditate for a short time over and over again, but we 
then need to develop our meditation. To do this, we just prolong it a 
bit. When we lengthen the duration of our meditation by just a little 
bit, this is what we call the second method, continual resting. 
RETRIEVING AND RESTING 
If your meditation immediately becomes great and sustained, that is 
wonderful, but sometimes that does not happen. Sometimes thoughts 
occur while we are meditating. When a thought does occur during 
your meditation, you should not get upset about it. You should not 
think that you are a terrible meditator or get discouraged in any way. 
You should not think that you are not doing it right-that is not at 
all necessary. On the other hand, if you follow thoughts that occur 
while you are meditating as they go on their merry little way, that 
does not work either. You cannot just keep on following the thoughts. 
Instead, you need to recognize what is happening. You need to rec­
ognize that you were resting, but then you had a thought and got 
distracted. Do not see that distraction as a fault or problem; just go 
back to how you were resting before. This is the third step, called re­
trieving and resting: put aside any thought that might have occurred 
and go back to your meditation. 
Thus we have three different methods: resting, continually resting, 
and retrieving and resting. These are good methods to work with 
118 
DEVOTION AND STABILITY 
in your tranquility meditation; they will help you to develop stabil­
ity in your meditation. But in meditating like this, we are not really 
looking at the essence of the mind. We are primarily working with 
stability when we practice tranquility. 
TAMING AND PACIFYING 
When we do shamatha regularly, sometimes a lot of thoughts will 
arise or we will not have much clarity of mind. When this happens, 
there are two different remedies: taming and pacifying. 
When we have a lot of thoughts that we cannot stop, we need to 
think to ourselves, "From the time I was little until now, I have had 
millions of thoughts, but they have not helped me in any way." Some­
times our thoughts-seem like they are important, but really they are 
not-there is no point to them. As the great master Shantideva said: 
For those whose minds are slack and wandering 
Are caught between the fangs of the afflictions. 
People who have many thoughts also have many afflictions- they are 
caught in the maw of the afflictions just as if they were trapped be­
tween the fangs of a carnivorous beast. If this happens, you can look 
at all the thoughts and think that they are no good, that they are a 
problem. This is the method of taming: when we realize that we lack 
control over our mind, we should think about the faults of excessive 
thinking, and that will help to tame our minds. 
The next method is pacifying. Pacifying means to think about the 
benefits of tranquility meditation. We realize that through the meth­
ods of tranquility meditation we can develop the real deep holding of 
samadhi; we will develop clarity and stability. This will be beneficial 
for us-we can gain control over our minds. When we reflect on the 
benefits of meditation again and again, we get excited and joyous 
about our meditation. This will help us to gain some discipline over 
our mind. This is the method of pacifying. When we find ourselves 
unable to control our minds, we should try practicing these methods 
of taming and pacification as a remedy. 
These are five of the nine methods of resting the mind. They will 
be helpful for you in your meditation, as they will help you develop 
119 
THE RESTING MEDITATION OF A KUSULU 
stability. This is not a situation where you necessarily have any 
recognition of the way things are-there may not be much clarity. 
It is merely resting stably and easily. This is tranquility meditation. It 
is on the support of that stability that we can develop insight medita­
tion. Insight is meditation that has intelligence. Tranquility medi­
tation by itself lacks intelligence, which is why it does not work as a 
true remedy for the afflictions. 
The analytic meditation of the pandita discussed above differs 
from tranquility in that it is a way of coming to know the nature of 
the mind and seeing the mind's essence. It is seeing that mind cannot 
be established as anything, seeing that it has clarity, and also seeing 
the union of clarity and emptiness. Tranquility lacks this wisdom, but 
it does provide the basis on which we can develop the intelligence of 
insight meditation. 
120 
10 
GETTING RIGHT DOWN 
TO MEDITATION 
THERE ARE TWO PARTS to the instructions on the resting medi­
tation of the kusulu. The first part is the instructions on resolving. 
The Tibetan word translated here as resolving literally means to. climb 
straight over a pass without making switchbacks back and forth-it 
means to go directly there. Here it means to go right into samadhi 
meditation. The second part of the instructions is distinguishing 
mind from awareness. Sometimes we are distracted, and sometimes 
we are not. When we are distracted, that is mind, and when we are 
undistracted, that is awareness. When we are not distracted, it is very 
easy to know the nature of the mind. But when we are distracted, 
we have many different thoughts that prevent us from knowing the 
mind-essence. This is the aspect of confusion. "Distinguishing" means 
telling these two states apart. 
For the main practice of the resting meditation of a kusulu, let 
your mind and body become comfortable, soft, and relaxed. Do 
not think of anything, and rest naturally. The important point here 
is that we do not think of anything. Do not think about the past 
and do not think about the future. Do not think of anything at all. 
You should not do this by tightening or gripping, but instead by 
being loose, relaxed, and comfortable. just let yourself rest naturally 
within this, without thinking. In the analytic meditation of the pan­
dita, there is an examination of where the mind is, what it is like, 
121 
THE RESTING MEDITATION OF A KUSULU 
what color it is, and so forth. But here there is no such examina­
tion: let your mind rest loosely and naturally. Just look at whatever 
feelings arise. 
RESTING THE BoDY AND MIND 
Khenpo Gangshar's instructions on insight meditation begin with 
four points on posture: 
Keep your body straight, refrain from talking, open your 
mouth slightly, and let the breath flow naturally. 
The first instruction is to keep your body straight so that the mind 
will be clear. The second instruction is to refrain from talking. If we 
talk while meditating, we will have a lot of thoughts. It will be dif­
ficult for our minds to rest and be clear, so we refrain from talking. 
The third instruction is to open your mouth slightly. Don't close your 
mouth, but don't let it gape open either. This means to let your body 
relax. As the great Machig Labdron said, "Let the four limbs relax." 
This is important for your meditation. The fourth instruction is to 
let the breath flow normally. If your breath is moving quickly, let it 
move quickly. If it is moving slowly, let it move slowly. Do not try to 
make your long breaths into short breaths; do not try to make short 
breaths into long breaths. Do not hold your breath or do anything 
else to it. However it is, just let it be, which means not to change it in 
any way. These four points tell us how to let the body rest. There is no 
effort of the body that would produce many thoughts in the mind. 
This is taught so that we will be able to clearly recognize the nature 
of the mind. 
In addition to these, Khenpo Gangshar also teaches methods for 
resting the mind: 
Don't pursue the past and don't invite the future. Simply 
rest naturally in the naked ordinary mind of the immediate 
present without trying to correct it or "re-place" it. 
The instruction here is that external appearances, whatever they may 
be, do not really hurt us. It all comes down to the mind. Is the mind 
122 
GETTING RIGHT DOWN TO MEDITATION 
some hardened, solid lump to which we cannot do anything at all? 
It is not. The mind is naturally empty of essence, but it is also clear. 
This is the union of clarity and emptiness, and the union of wisdom 
and the expanse taught in the path of the sutras. This is present in the 
nature of the mind itself. But we have not really thought about what 
this means. We direct our attention outward, follow thoughts of all 
sorts of things, and get distracted. But all we really need to do is know 
what is present in the mind. 
In order to know that, Khenpo Gangshar says, "Don't pursue the 
past." Often we remember things that happened in the past and think 
about them. We think, "Last year I went to that place. I had such and 
such a conversation. When I did this, it turned out really well. When 
I did that, it was bad." These and many other thoughts come up, but 
we should not pursue them when we are meditating. We should just 
be loose and relaxed and not follow the past.· 
Khenpo Gangshar also says, "Don't invite the future." Often we 
think to ourselves, "Next year I ought to do this. What should I do next 
month? I have to do that tomorrow. What should I do this evening?" 
These are all thoughts of the future. Normally we need to think about 
them, but not when we are meditating, so we should not welcome 
the future. We should put all thoughts of past or future aside. 
In particular during this meditation, "Do not pursue the past" 
means do not think even about things that happened even just a mo­
ment ago. Do not try to remember, "What was I just thinking about? 
Was I just resting? Was I just stable? Was that clarity? What was it 
that I was just meditating on?" We should not try to think about or 
remember what we were just doing in our meditation in that way. 
Similarly, we normally understand "Don't invite the future" to mean 
that we should not think about future plans in general, but in this 
context it means not even to think about what we will do in the next 
moment. We do not need to think to ourselves, "Now I need to start 
being mindful. I need to start being aware now. Now I'm going to 
start being clear in my meditation." We do not need to think about 
anything at all-we do not think about either the past or the future. 
We just simply look at the mind as it is right now and rest naturally 
in the naked, ordinary mind. 
123 
THE RESTING MEDITATION OF A KUSULU 
When we say "ordinary mind," that means resting in the immedi­
ate present without trying to alter the mind in any way. Ordinary 
mind is not something bad that we need to make into something 
good. Nor is it something that is not empty that we need to make 
empty. That is not how it is. We do not need to take something that 
is not clear and make it clear. We should not try to change anything 
in any way. If you alter it, it is not ordinary. If you follow lots of 
thoughts, that is not what we mean by ordinary mind. just rest in the 
nature of the mind as it is, without any thoughts that are virtuous, 
unvirtuous, or neutral. The way it is now is ordinary mind. 
There are two different ways in which we can understand the term 
"ordinary mind." One way is to not take control over anything and 
end up following our afflictions. When a thought of anger arises, we 
follow it; when greed arises, we lose control of ourselves to it. Simi­
larly, we lose control of ourselves to our pride and jealousy. Although 
we might think of this as our ordinary state of mind, it is not what 
we mean here. Here it does not mean losing control of ourselves to 
our negative emotions. Instead, it means that we do not need to do 
anything at all to the essence of the mind itsel£ 
We do not need to alter this essence in any way. We do not have to 
worry about what we are thinking, what is pleasant, or what is pain­
ful. We can leave this mind as it is. If we try to alter the mind in any 
way, thoughts will arise. But if we do not do anything to it and let it 
rest easily, then it is unaltered. The Kagyu masters of the past as an 
instruction called this the ordinary mind, or the natural state. They 
called it this out of their experience. This ordinary mind itself is the 
dharma expanse and the essence of the buddhas: it is our buddha 
nature. This is exactly what the term means; this is what we need to 
experience and recognize. 
Khenpo Gangshar calls this ordinary mind "naked." If we just have 
mere understanding, there is a slight gap between our mind and our 
understanding. When we try to investigate or analyze, it is as if the 
mind were covered by a sort of a membrane. But here there is noth­
ing like that. Saying "naked" means there is no covering or anything 
in the way. We just rest directly in it as it is without trying to cor­
rect it or re-place it. We do not think, "Is this right? I need to make 
124 
GETTING RIGHT DOWN TO MEDITATION 
it right." We do not worry, "My meditation is bad; I've got to make 
it good." Without any hopes or worries, we do not try to correct it 
or make it right in any way. When Khenpo Gangshar says "re-place," 
that means that we do not try one way to settle the mind and then 
another. We just let it be as it naturally is, resting easily in this naked, 
ordinary mind. 
RECOGNIZING THE EXPERIENCE 
OF RESTING 
What does it feel like to rest like that? 
If you rest like that, your mind-essence is clear and expan­
sive, vivid and naked, without any concerns about thought 
or recollection, joy or pain. That is awareness (rigpa). 
At this point, there is no concern about what you are thinking, what 
you remember, what is nice, or what is painful. You will not think, 
"Ah, that is what it is." You will not think, "This is empty," or "This 
is not empty." You will not think, "Oh, that's nice," or "Oh that's not 
so nice," or "That's bad." There won't be any thought of pleasure or 
displeasure in any way at all. This is just the natural essence of the 
mind. It is not something that makes us jubilantly happy, nor is it 
something that upsets us or makes us unhappy. 
But you will see the mind-essence and it will be clear and expan­
sive, vivid and naked. When we say "clear," this is like the clear as­
pect of the mind. When we talk about it being clear or luminous, 
sometimes we understand that as meaning some sort of a light-a 
blazingly bright light. But that is not what this means. It means that 
it can know and understand. It does not stop. We do not turn into 
some sort of rock. That is not what happens: there is the clear, know­
ing aspect of the mind. It is also expansive, which means here that 
the clarity is vast: we can see and know many things. Then the text 
says "vivid and naked." "Vivid" means that it is as if we are actually 
seeing-it is right there and we are really seeing it. There is no doubt 
whether or not this is it-it is just right there. It is naked: we are not 
thinking about it with logic or seeing it from far away; it is right here. 
125 
THE RESTING MEDITATION OF A KUSULU 
There is no veil or anything covering it at all. This is what we rest in; 
this is the nature of the mind. 
We do not try to change anything; we rest directly in equipoise­
the kusulu meditates in an uncomplicated way. The reason for resting 
loosely like this is that our meditation is not something that is not 
mentally constructed and newly made. Instead, it is just the way the 
mind is, unaltered. Normally we are deluded by many confused ap­
pearances, but the meditation of the kusulu should be understood as 
knowing the nature of the mind as it is, clearly and without mistake. 
This is not just something that Khenpo Gangshar says. It is also 
said in The Supreme Continuum and The Ornament of Clear Realization 
by Maitreya as well as in The Two Books, the tantra of the glorious 
Hevajra. These works all say: 
In this there's nothing to remove 
Nor anything at all to add. 
By viewing rightness rightly and 
By seeing rightly-liberation! 
There is nothing to remove. We do not need to stop or get rid of any­
thing, thinking, "This is emptiness. This cannot be established as a 
thing." The nature of the mind is fine just as it is. Nor is there anything 
to add to the mind-essence, thinking, "That is missing. This is clarity. 
This is something I need to gain." If we just look at the mind-essence 
rightly and rest in equipoise within this nature of the mind just as it 
is, not following our thoughts, we will see that it is rightness. We do 
not need to think, "It is emptiness"-its essence is naturally empty. 
We do not need to think, "It is clear"-its essence is naturally clear. 
Resting with this mind as it is is "viewing rightness rightly." When we 
see that essence as it is, at that moment we will be liberated from our 
faults and from samsara. 
This is why we just rest right in the nature of mind as it is. The 
dharma nature is unchanging. When the great meditators of the past 
meditated on it, they saw that we do not need to alter it in any way. 
We just need to come to thoroughly know the dharma nature as it is. 
When we see that, this is the mind that we call clear and expansive, 
vivid and awake. 
126 
GETTING RIGHT DOWN TO MEDITATION 
When Marpa the Translator met his guru Naropa and developed 
experience within himself, he said: 
For instance, when a mute eats sugar cane, 
It is an inexpressible experience. 
When mute people eat sugar cane, they put the cane in their mouths, 
they taste it, and they know what it tastes like, but if you ask them 
what it is like, they cannot tell you. Similarly, Marpa had an experi­
ence of realization, but when he felt it, he could not express it in any 
way-it was an inexpressible experience. Was it something? It was not. 
Was it nothing? It was not. It was indescribable. This is what Khenpo 
Gangshar means by saying that there is no concern about what you 
might be thinking, what you might remember, what is pleasant, or 
what is painful. Without any thoughts of good or bad or anything 
like that, the essence of the mind i~ clear and expansive, vivid and 
naked. You might wonder if this is a nature that we have to somehow 
create, but it is not. It is the nature of the mind that has been present 
within us from the very beginning. But up to this point, we just have 
not looked for it. We have not seen it because we have not looked for 
it. If W<;! know how to look for it, we can know what it is like. All we 
need to do is look for it and see it. That is the essence of the mind. 
THE KNOWING QpALITY OF MIND 
As I mentioned above, there is· a distinction between tranquility and 
insight meditation. In tranquility, there is a lot of stability but not 
much intelligence, whereas in insight meditation we do have intel­
ligence. In general, there are three types of intelligence: the intelli­
gence born of listening, that born of contemplation, and that born 
of meditation. The intelligence born of listening and contemplating 
is directed outward. It is dependent upon inference, so it is a concep­
tual understanding or meaning generality. It means the clarity of the 
mind that knows, "That's right. That's what it is." But is this the intel­
ligence present during insight meditation? It is not. The intelligence 
present in meditation is the intelligence born of meditation. The 
difference between this and the intelligence born of listening and 
127 
THE RESTING MEDITATION OF A KUSULU 
contemplating is that the latter is conceptual knowing that gets to 
the point through inference. In the intelligence born of meditation, 
there are not many thoughts of that kind; it is actually seeing and 
experiencing. It is a direct experience of the essence of the mind. 
When we experience our essence, do we experience it as some sort 
of a thing? That is not the experience we have. Do we experience it 
as emptiness? We do not experience it as emptiness. It is empty­
something that you cannot establish, nothing at all-but at the same 
time there is clarity. You could call this the aspect of wisdom. It is 
not just blank nothingness, it is the union of clarity and emptiness. 
There is clarity, but the essence of this clarity is emptiness. This is 
what we actually experience. If we were to think about it, we would 
say, "Oh, that's what mind is." Of course that would just be a thought 
produced by our minds; when we actually experience it, we do not 
have this thought. Instead, we have a feeling. This is the intelligence 
born of meditation that comes from directly seeing the nature of 
mind as it is. When we directly see the nature of mind as it is, it is 
not just nothingness, blankness, or darkness. Instead, we experience 
this intelligence and rest evenly within this experience. 
What do we feel in that sort of meditation? Khenpo Gangshar's 
instructions say: 
At the same time, there is no thought of, "Sights and sounds 
are out there." Everything appears unceasingly. There is 
also no thought of, "The perceiver, the six types of con­
sciousness, is within." Clear and nonconceptual awareness . . 
IS unceasmg. 
While we are resting in meditation, we do not think about external 
objects such as forms, sounds, scents, tastes, and touch being out there. 
Are there any coarse thoughts? There are not. But does this mean that 
everything ceases? When we are in samadhi meditation does it mean 
that our eyes stop seeing things, our ears stop hearing, and our nose 
stops smelling? At that point, our eyes can still see forms, our ears can 
still hear sounds, and our nose can still smell scents, but -..ye do not 
think about what they are. The mind does not stop; there is clarity. 
External perceived objects do not cease; they continue to occur. 
128 
GETTING RIGHT DOWN TO MEDITATION 
In terms of the internal perceiving subject, there is not any thought 
that there is an internal consciousness that knows the objects. We 
do not conceive of the six consciousnesses. But do all the conscious­
nesses just stop in meditation? Does the eye consciousness stop see­
ing form? Does the ear consciousness stop hearing sound? Does the 
mind completely stop? They do not. There is a consciousness that 
sees visual forms. There is a consciousness that hears sounds, one that 
smell scents, and so forth. The consciousnesses are present. Even if 
they were to stop, there is still naked and clear awareness. There may 
not be any thoughts, but there is someone who knows, understands, 
and sees. 
Neither the six internal perceiving consciousnesses nor the six ex­
ternal perceived objects stop. Whether or not we examine it in great 
detail, the mind does not stop. When we are seeing the nature of the 
mind, things still appear to us. This nonconceptual, naked awareness 
is unceasing, and it is also clear. There is a knowing clarity: the six 
consciousnesses know things clearly. They do not stop: the eye does 
not stop seeing form, the ear does not stop hearing sound, the nose 
does not stop smelling scent, the tongue does not stop tasting, the 
body does not stop feeling touch, and sixth, mental consciousness 
does not stop knowing. Knowing does not stop, and so for this rea­
son it is clear. It is clear, but there are no coarse thoughts. We are not 
thinking to ourselves, "That's what it is. I see this. I hear that sound." 
This is awareness-naked awareness. It's like there's no veil or cover­
ing; we perceive everything as it is, unceasingly. It does not become 
nothingness. To make it easy to understand, I often say that we do not 
become rocks with no thought or awareness at all. In this way the six 
types of outer objects and the six consciousnesses are unceasing. 
Resting within this is similar to the instruction in the "Short 
Vajradhara Lineage Prayer" that says, "The main practice is being un­
distracted, as it's taught." When meditating, the main point is to be 
undistracted. As the prayer says: 
As ones who, whatever arises, rest simply, 
Not altering, in just that fresh essence of thought, 
Please bless us with practice that's free of conception. 
129 
THE RESTING MEDITATION OF A KUSULU 
There are still things that occur-the eye, ear, and other conscious­
nesses continue to happen- but whatever occurs, we rest simply 
within it, not changing it. We do not need to do anything to the fresh 
essence of thoughts. The point here is to have no fixation or grasping, 
which is why we ask that our meditation practice be free of concep­
tion. Generally this verse is explained to teach tranquility meditation, 
which it does, but the tranquility it teaches is unified with insight, so 
it is the same as Khenpo Gangshar's instruction. 
In his shorter instructions, Khenpo Gangshar says: 
Directly, whatever arises, do not change it-rest naturally. 
The phrase directly comes out ofKhenpo Gangshar's own exceptional 
experience, and there is a reason for saying it. These instructions are 
not telling us to try to do something to the nature of mind after we 
look for it--,-we should not analyze it and then chase after it. You 
might think to yourself, "A thought occurred." Then this leads to an­
other thought occurring, and then another, and another. First there 
may be a prideful thought, then maybe an angry thought, and then 
more and more thoughts. This is just following them, and there is no 
end to that. 
What we really need to do is to look directly at our thoughts. We 
look straight at this present mind and nurture it directly. This is in re­
lation to the way it actually is-naked. This is why he says "directly." 
Whatever occurs, look directly. If a good thought arises, look di­
rectly at it, and if a bad thought arises, look directly at it. Do not alter 
it. You do not need to look at it, think up the sentence, "This is empti­
ness," and then plaster that onto your experience. Nor do you need 
to say, "This is clarity," and then try to see it that way. Instead, look at 
the essence and see it as it is, not altering it in any way. Rest naturally 
in equipoise within the unaltered essence itsel£ 
LOOKING INWARD 
In one of his meditation manuals, Jamgon Kongtrul Rinpoche says 
that the reason we do not realize the nature of the mind is not be­
cause it is too difficult, but because it is too easy. The nature of the 
130 
GETTING RIGHT DOWN TO MEDITATION 
mind is something that we have, so we think, "It can't be that." There's 
nothing we need to do to it; there is nothing complicated about it. 
Do we not realize it because it is far away? No, it is not-rather, it 
is too near. It is so dose to us that we already have it, but we do not 
realize this. For this reason we do not need to make up an essence to 
rest in; we rest within our own nature as it is. This is how we should 
meditate. 
When I was young, I studied philosophy, including the middle way. 
Middle way texts talk a lot about different types of emptiness such as 
categorized emptiness, uncategorized emptiness, and so forth. When 
I asked my khenpo, Khenpo Lodro Rabsal, "What is this? What does 
emptiness mean?" he said, "Don't think so much about the outside. 
Think a bit about the inside, and that will help." 
"Ah," I thought. "How can you do that? How can you think about 
the inside?" I did not understand what he meant. I thought there was 
probably nothing to think about on the inside. 
Then later I met Khenpo Gangshar. Everyone said, "He is a strange 
lama. There's something different about him. You get a different feel­
ing from him." 
I wondered what they meant. The first time I saw him, there was 
no different feeling. I wondered what was going on and what was 
going to happen. Then he first gave a pointing out of sorts. He asked, 
"Did you recognize anything?" but nothing happened. But as I spent 
some time in his presence, I had the thought, "Oh, this is it. This is 
the emptiness that Nagarjuna talked about, isn't it!" Before I had 
thought that emptiness was something far away, but then I came to 
see that emptiness is really dose. This happened because of the bless­
ings of the lama. 
At that point I realized what Jamgon Kongtrul Rinpoche had 
meant by saying it was too near. I realized what he meant by saying 
it was too easy. The mind is not far away; it is within us. If you fiddle 
with it and alter it a lot, then it becomes fabricated. That doesn't 
work. The essence of the mind itself, however it may be, is just the 
way it is. We need to meditate by looking at it the way it is. 
There are many different methods for pointing out the nature of 
mind through symbols and so forth. Often students gain some sort 
131 
THE RESTING MEDITATION OF A KUSULU 
of feeling during these, but it is not very stable. But these instructions 
on resolving, or getting straight to meditation, are the best method to 
point out the nature of mind. You just get right down to the medita­
tion. You put a lot of effort into it. You meditate. You think it over. 
You think about what the instructions say over and over again. Some­
times the feeling is clear, and sometimes it is unclear. But when it is 
unclear, you do not give up. Put effort into it and meditate, and then 
it will become stable. Of all the different ways to point out the nature 
of your mind, this is the best. 
132 
11 
THE BENEFITS 
OF THE KUSULU'S 
MEDITATION 
WHAT IS THE MAIN POINT about the resting meditation of 
the kusulu? It is that we do not need to make any effort or alter 
anything. Why is this? Is our mind something lousy that we need to 
change into something good? It is not; we do not need to change it. 
We just need to recognize that our mind is rightness. We have not yet 
recognized this, so we rest in meditation so that we can recognize the 
nature of the mind to be the rightness that it is. 
The last chapter described the experience and feelings that arise 
in our mind and told us what the clear aspect of our mind is like. 
Khenpo Gangshar's text next teaches the qualities and benefits of this 
meditation. What is the purpose of meditating like this? How does it 
affect our body? How does it affect our speech? How does it affect our 
mind? First the text discusses what happens with our body: 
While in that state, your body is left to itself without fabri­
cation, free and easy. That is the body of all the victorious 
ones. That is the essence of the creation stage. 
When we are resting in equipoise without altering anything, we 
do not tighten or tense our body or try to change it in any way. 
Instead, we just let it rest naturally, not doing anything to it. We let 
133 
THE RESTING MEDITATION OF A KUSULU 
whatever feelings happen happen. Without any discomfort at all, 
our body becomes free and easy. Resting in this way, we can receive 
all of the blessings of the creation stage. 
When we see the essence of the mind, are we at that point actu­
ally doing the creation stage of visualizing a deity? We are not, but 
the essence of the creation stage is the realization of the nature of 
all phenomena as they are. That is why this practice is the essence of 
the creation stage and why this is the body of all the victorious ones, 
even though we are not doing anything in particular with our body 
other than just letting it rest and relax. These are the benefits for 
the body. 
Next, the text presents the benefits for our speech: 
Your speech is free from fabrication, without efforts to track 
down the root of sound but simply expressing directly and 
openly whatever comes to mind. It is all-pervasive from the 
very moment of being heard, a nonarising empty resound­
ing. That is the speech of all the victorious ones. It is the 
essence of all recitation. 
We do not alter our speech in any way, either. We do not have any 
harmful intentions to say mean things or fool anyone; we just let 
the speech come as it is, loose and relaxed. We say whatever we need 
to say while experiencing the realization of the nature of the mind. 
While we are conversing, we do not really worry about where the 
sound comes from or how it occurs: the sound just happens. We 
hear it sound, but if we were to look for where it comes from and 
where it is, we would realize that at the same time as it sounds, it 
is empty; it just dissipates into space. While it is empty, it sounds. 
It is the union of sound and emptiness. Letting it be unaltered and 
loose, it becomes the speech of the buddhas and the essence of man­
tra recitation. 
At this point, we are not actually reciting a mantra. However, in 
essence, a mantra is a way to generate the wisdom that realizes the 
dharma nature and the way our mind is, so resting in the nature of 
the mind is like the essence of that mantra recitation. 
Those are the benefits for the body and speech when we are resting 
134 
THE BENEFITS OF THE KUSULU'S MEDITATION 
in the realization of the dharma nature as it is. What are the benefits 
for the mind? The text says: 
When you rest your mind in unfabricated naturalness, no 
matter what thought may arise, good or evil, happy or sad, 
the mind-essence, which is free from concerns about joy or 
sorrow, is clear and empty, naked and awake. 
When we sit in samadhi, sometimes we have good thoughts. Some­
times we have bad thoughts. Sometimes we have happy thoughts, and 
sometimes we have unhappy thoughts. We might feel some sort of 
depression. Although it is possible that any of these thoughts might 
happen, we do not encourage the thoughts, nor do we try to repress 
or stop them in any way. Instead, we just go back to resting in the 
unfabricated naturalness just as we had been before, without altering 
in any way at all. If a good and joyful thought arises, there is nothing 
to be happy about and nothing to prolong. If you just rest loosely 
when a sad or harmful thought arises, there is nothing to be upset 
or sad about, and nothing to repress. If we just rest naturally within 
whatever occurs, thoughts will naturally disappear because their na­
ture is nonarising. Thus we just let ourselves settle naturally. 
If we look at the characteristics of this mind-essence that is free of 
concerns about joy or sorrow, it is clear and empty, naked and awake. 
As we said before, clear means that the mind does not become like 
some unknowing rock. When we say that it is empty, that means it is 
not some sort of inherently existent thing. But how do we look at the 
clear and empty mind? We look at it nakedly: we look directly with­
out anything between the mind and ourselves. We do not investigate 
or alter it in any way. We look straight at it and know what its nature 
is. The essence of mind is also awake, which means that it is vivid 
and clear. It does not become some sort of dark, black unknowing, 
nor is there any dullness or fogginess: it is vivid and awake. 
The Tibetan word for naked,jenpa, has another meaning as well: 
it also means uncooked or raw. It is like a salad: if you steam salad 
greens, they get limp and mushy. Frying them is not much better. 
So when you have salad, you eat your greens just as they are: not 
steamed, not fried-just raw. You don't do anything to them at all. In 
135 
THE RESTING MEDITATION OF A KUSULU 
the same way, we do not need to think that the mind is good so we 
make it into something wonderful or that the mind is bad so we need 
to improve it. We meditate by just leaving the mind exactly as it is. 
SYNONYMS FOR THE NATURE 
OF THE MIND 
The text continues: 
This mind-essence is the nature of all sentient beings, the 
realization of the budd has of the three times, the essence of 
the eighty-four thousand Dharma-doors and the heart of 
the glorious master, the supreme guide. 
Our meditation should have all four of these characteristics: clear, 
empty, naked, and awake. This is the nature of our own mind, and 
it is the same for all sentient beings-the essence of everyone's mind 
is the same. 
The nature of the mind is also "the realization of all the buddhas of 
the three times." The essence of all the teachings of the Buddha, the 
teachings on the selflessness of the individual and on the selflessness 
of phenomena, is to rest in the nature of the mind. The budd has have 
all taught many different types of Dharma, but they taught them all 
as a way to realize the nature of the mind without mistake. If you 
can rest in the nature of the mind, that is the realization of all the 
budd has of the three times. 
The Buddha taught the Dharma in order to protect all sentient 
beings from suffering. The Dharma that he taught is the eighty-four 
thousand gates of the Dharma. The eighty-four thousand gates of the 
Dharma are the antidotes that tame the afflictions of greed, aversion, 
delusion, and mixtures of those three poisons. But the root of all of 
these is the intelligence that realizes selflessness. All of the gates of 
Dharma were taught in order to generate the wisdom that realizes 
the selflessness of both individuals and phenomena, so the resting 
meditation of the kusulu is the essence of the eighty-four thousand 
gates of the Dharma. 
It is "the heart of the glorious master, the supreme guide," which 
THE BENEFITS OF THE KUSULU'S MEDITATION 
means it is the essence of the experience of the mind nature of all 
the masters. Many instructions say that we need to mix our minds 
with the mind of the master. We should have great devotion in the 
root and lineage masters, mix our minds with theirs, and develop 
excellent realization. Seeing our mind-essence is the same as doing 
just that. 
When the Buddha taught the Dharma, he taught both the vast 
sutras and the profound tantras. The text next discusses how resting 
in the nature of mind is the essence of both of those, staning with 
the sutra vehicles: 
It is the transcendent knowledge of the second set of teach­
ings and the sugata-essence of the last turning of the wheel 
of the Dharma. 
When the Buddha taught the sutras, he taught it in what are called 
the three wheels of Dharma, or cycles of teachings. The first of these 
is the foundation vehicle, which is the basis for all the other teach­
ings, but it is not specifically mentioned here. What is taught here are 
the teachings of the great vehicle from the second and third wheels of 
Dharma. In the second wheel of Dharma, the Buddha taught about 
transcendent intelligence, and in the last wheel, he taught about 
buddha nature. 
The second wheel of Dharma teaches that all the objects that we 
perceive are empty and then says that the conscious subject that per­
ceives this emptiness is transcendent intelligence, or prajfiaparamita. 
When teaching emptiness directly, we follow the logic of the mid­
dle way through which we can come to understand that everything 
is emptiness. This is taught through the sixteen different types of 
emptiness or fourfold emptiness. But who is it that realizes that all 
phenomena are emptiness? It is the transcendent intelligence that 
sees ·the emptiness as it is and realizes it and knows it as it is. This is 
said to be the mother who gives birth to all of the buddhas, because 
if you ask where the buddhas come from, they come out of transcen­
dent intelligence. 
This transcendent intelligence is also what we are trying to come 
to recognize through the resting meditations of the kusulu and the 
137 
THE RESTING MEDITATION OF A KUSULU 
analytic meditation of the pandita. The nature of all phenomena of 
course permeates all phenomena, but in the secret mantra vajrayana 
we primarily put the emphasis on our own minds. There is no need 
to alter the mind. With external objects, we have to stamp them with 
the idea that they are emptiness, but there is no need to stamp our 
internal mind with the idea that it is emptiness. If we know the es­
sence of the mind itself, we will naturally realize the empty nature 
of how things are. The realization of the nature of the mind-the 
realization of the way the dharma nature actually is-is the same 
as what is called the great mother, transcendent intelligence, in the 
second wheel of Dharma. 
The buddha nature taught in the third wheel of Dharma is also 
just that. The third wheel of Dharma primarily teaches that there is 
buddha nature present within the mind streams of all sentient be­
ings. Buddha nature is the emptiness of all phenomena, but it is not 
inanimate emptiness. Buddha nature is the union of clarity and emp­
tiness. The third wheel teaches that the union of the unborn empty 
expanse and the clear wisdom is present within the mind streams of 
all sentient beings. We just have not looked at that which is present 
within us. If we look, we can actually experience it. If we experience 
it and then meditate on it, then it is also called the seed of buddha~ 
hood as well as buddha nature. However, when we wander in samsara 
this nature of ours is concealed by the afflictions. Although we have 
buddha nature, we do not recognize it. We need to make it mani­
fest by cleansing it of the stains that hide it. But what does the term 
buddha nature designate? It points directly to the nature of the mind. 
The third wheel of Dharma teaches methods to make it manifest, and 
in this way its meaning is just this-the nature of the mind. Thus 
the transcendent intelligence and buddha nature taught in the sutras 
are just this. 
Khenpo Gangshar then discusses the tantras: 
According to the general system of mantra it is called conti­
nuity of ground, the spontaneously present mandala of the 
innate nature. According to the anuttara tantras it is called 
Guhyasamaja, Chakrasamvara, Kalachakra, and so forth. 
THE BENEFITS OF THE KUSULU'S MEDITATION 
In the mantra vehicle, there are four different classes of tantras. The 
first three classes-action tantra, conduct tantra, and yoga tantra­
are considered lower classes in comparison to the founh class, the 
unexcelled yoga tantra, so they are considered the general system of 
tantras. The common tantras teach about the ground tantra, path 
tantra, and result tantra. When we say "ground tantra," this means 
that now during the period when we are ordinary sentient beings 
there is a "continuity of the ground," our innate nature. This "spon­
taneously present mandala of the innate nature" is the nature of the 
mind-essence that we can experience in meditation. 
Within the uncommon teachings of the anuttara or unexcelled 
tantras, there are two different traditions: the ancient Nyingma trans­
lations and the later Sarma or "new" translations. Both the Nyingma 
and Sarma traditions come from the lineage of the great Indian maha­
siddhas, which itself came from the Buddha. The origins of the two 
traditions are the same, but they spread to Tibet at different times. 
The tantras and teachings of the ancient Nyingma school came to 
Tibet during the time of the great early Dharma kings, when there 
were many great translators who translated the tantras of the Indian 
tradition as well as the sutras and treatises. After the Nyingma tra­
dition spread in Tibet, the Buddhist teachings were nearly wiped 
out by King Langdarma. When the Dharma was revived, once again 
there were many great translators who translated the Indian tantras 
into Tibetan. These are the translators of the new ot Sarma tradition. 
These two traditions teach the same essential meaning, but they use 
different language. 
In the Sarma tradition of the Kagyu and Sakya lineages, this is 
called the unexcelled yoga or anuttarayoga. Within the unexcelled 
yoga tantras, there are the father tantras such as the Guhyasamaja 
tantra, mother tantras such as the Chakrasamvara tantra, and non­
dual tantras such as the Kalachakra. The father tantras primarily 
teach means, the mother tantras primarily teach intelligence, and 
the nondual tantras teach both means and intelligence together. 
When we do the practices of these tantras, we meditate on the dei­
ties. Sometimes we visualize ourselves as the deity, sometimes we 
visualize the deities in front of us, and sometimes we visualize them 
139 
THE RESTING MEDITATION OF A KUSULU 
inside vases, take empowerment, and so forth. But what is the foun­
dation of all of these practices? It is the pure appearance of the es­
sence of the mind that is naturally present within sentient beings; it 
is not anything else. 
In the Nyingma tradition, there are three inner tantras: the maha­
yoga, anuyoga, and atiyoga. The mahayoga talks about the great 
dharmakaya, the exalted inseparability of the two truths, but this 
is nothing other than the nature of our mind. The anuyoga calls it 
"the basic mandala of the bodhichitta of the child great bliss," but 
it is the same thing. According to atiyoga, it is the great perfection 
of awareness and emptiness-dzogchen. 
All of these terms are just different names given to the nature of 
the mind. As Khenpo Gangshar says: 
All these renowned expressions point a finger at this mind­
essence itself, and nothing else. 
All of the different expressions from sutras and tantras are just ways to 
identify and point out to us the mind-essence itself. Whether we say 
the emptiness of all phenomena, buddha nature, or dzogchen, they 
do not mean anything else. Therefore when we are practicing the 
resting meditation of the kusulu, we just settle our minds within this, 
resting within the realization of empty nature that is naturally clear. 
This is what the sutras teach in both the middle and final wheels of 
Dharma. It is also what is taught in all the tantras-the general tan­
teas, the unexcelled yoga tantras, and the three inner tantras. These 
are all just different ways for us to come to know the nature of our 
mind-instructions that help us see it, recognize it, and then develop 
certainty in that recognition. 
The main thing we need is to realize the nature of the mind. It 
should not be a fleeting realization, but should be stable and devel­
oped. Is a fleeting glimpse of the nature of mind good? Of course it 
is, but that alone is not enough to truly free us of the obscurations 
within our being. That alone cannot develop all of the wisdom 
within our ability. Therefore we need to have stability in our rec­
ognition. If we do, we will be able to quell all the afflictions, and as 
a result of this all the qualities and wisdom will naturally develop. 
140 
THE BENEFITS OF THE KUSULU'S MEDITATION 
This is exactly what all of the Buddha's teachings of the sutras and 
tantras teach. 
THE UNANIMITY OF TIBETAN TRADITIONS 
When Buddhism spread in Tibet, there were several different tradi­
tions that developed. This happened because first a translator would 
go to India, learn a particular teaching, and then bring it back to 
Tibet and teach it. However, each translator lived in a different part 
of Tibet, so one translator's teachings would spread here, another's 
teachings would spread over there, and thus many different teach­
ings spread. That is how the different traditions arose in Tibet. If 
we look at it on the most basic level, there are four great tradi­
tions of Tibet. What is the meaning that all four of these traditions 
teach? Do they all teach something different? They do not. All four 
·of the different traditions of Tibet teach this very same nature of 
the mind. The meaning of all their teachings should be understood 
to be just that. 
Khenpo Gangshar explains how this is the view of the Gelug 
school: 
This point is also presented in the Gelug school, as stated by 
the Great Lord (Tsongkhapa), 
Appearance, the unfailing dependent origination, 
And emptiness, understanding beyond statements­
As long as these two seem to be separate, 
You have still not realized the intent of Shakyamuni. 
When all at once and without alternation, 
Your conviction and your notion of an object fall apart, 
That is the moment of having completed the analysis 
of the view. 
The basis of the view of the tradition of the mountain ofTushita, the 
Gelug school, is also the nature of the mind, as demonstrated by this 
verse from Tsongkhapa's prayer "The Three Principles of the Path." 
External appearances as well as the perceiving pan of our mind all 
141 
THE RESTING MEDITATION OF A KUSULU 
arise in dependence upon one another. This is the unfailing appear­
ance of interdependence or dependent origination, which means that 
things happen: appearances arise unfailingly-that is, always. The es­
sence of that is naturally empty. This emptiness is beyond the two 
statements, meaning that it is free of the four extremes. Here this is an 
understanding that we develop through logic: we come to realize that 
we cannot express it in words. Normally we think that when there are 
appearances, there can be no emptiness, and that when there is emp­
tiness, there cannot be appearances. We think of these two as separate. 
Appearances are appearances. When something appears, it is true and 
real. It is there. Emptiness is emptiness, void and nothingness; there 
is nothing there. So these two must be separate, we think. But when 
we think of them in this ordinary way, we have not really understood. 
If these two seem exclusive of each other-when there are appear­
ances there is no emptiness, and when there is emptiness there are no 
appearances-we have not realized "the intent of Shakyamuni," that 
is, what he is teaching. 
Actually, when we develop intelligence through study and then 
meditate, we begin to see that appearance and emptiness are not 
separate. We see that they do not alternate: at the same time as things 
appear, they are empty. At the same time as they are empty, they have 
the capacity to appear. We can see that this is the same as the nature 
of our mind: the mind is clear and knowing and yet at the same time 
it is empty. At the same time as it is empty, it is clear and knowing. 
This is what we call the spontaneous presence of mind, when the 
conception of an object falls apart. Appearance and emptiness are 
understood to be the same. This is when we have fully understood 
the view. Realizing this is the same in essence is realizing the unity 
of the clarity and emptiness of the nature of the mind. This is how 
Tsongkhapa, the founder of the Gelug school, presented the nature of 
the mind, and the intent of his teaching is the same as what Khenpo 
Gangshar teaches. 
The second of the four major schools of Tibetan Buddhism is the 
Sakya school. There were five main forefathers of the Sakya lineage, 
one of whom was the Lord of Dharma, Drakpa Gyaltsen, who was 
prophesied by Manjushri. 
THE BENEFITS OF THE KUSULU'S MEDITATION 
The Lord of Dharma, Drakpa Gyaltsen, has said, "When 
you have clinging, it is not the view." The Dharma masters 
of the Sakya school regard their view of undivided sam­
sara and nirvana to be nonfixation. 
Drakpa Gyaltsen talked about freedom from the four fixations. He 
says, "When you have clinging, it is not the view." If you cling to some­
thing as existing or as not existing, you have not seen or realized the 
view. The main point of the Sakya school is thus nonfixatipn. Thus 
the naked awareness that does not alter anything is the proper view. 
For this reason, the Sakyapa have what they call the view of the indi­
visibility of samsara and nirvana, which means to rest loosely, with­
out fixation within the mind-essence, so the teachings of the Sakya 
school are also the same. 
This is also the main teaching of the third school, the Kagyu 
lineage: 
Moreover, according to the matchless Kagyupa masters, glo­
rious Rangjung Dorje proclaimed, 
Everything's not true, not false, 
Like moons in water, say the wise. 
This ordinary mind itself 
Is dharma expanse, the victors' essence. 
Thus, the luminous mahamudra is also nonfixation. 
This passage Khenpo Gangshar cites is from Rangjung Dorje's "A 
Treatise on Buddha Nature." It means that all knowable phenomena 
are neither true nor false, like a reflection of the moon in water. If 
you see the moon in water, of course you see it, but is the moon really 
there? No, it is not, but you have to admit that you do see it in the 
water. All knowable phenomena are similarly neither true nor false. 
This is what the wise say, but really when we are meditating we don't 
need to do any of this. We do not need to say it is true. We do not need 
to say it is false. We don't need to say anything. What this actually 
points to is ordinary mind-the totally unaltered ordinary mind. It 
can be called the dharma expanse, or it can be called buddha nature, 
the essence of all the victors. Nurturing it without altering it is the 
143 
THE RESTING MEDITATION OF A KUSULU 
luminous mahamudra that does not have any fixation or clinging. 
Thus the meaning of mahamudra is the same. 
For this reason, Khenpo Gangshar says: 
It is said that all the learned and accomplished masters of 
India and Tibet had the same realization and there is not a 
single master who claims that the realization of the main 
part of practice is anything other than nonfixation. That is 
the meaning you should understand yourself and what you 
should point out to others. 
When Buddhism spread, there were many learned and accomplished. 
masters in India. When we say masters, this includes both scholars­
those learned in terms of studying and contemplating-and the maha­
siddhas, the people who practiced this through meditation. What they 
realized and taught is exactly the same as this. Since Buddhism spread 
to Tibet in the seventh century, there have been many learned and 
accomplished masters in many different traditions. There may have 
been many traditions, but the meaning they all taught was exactly the 
same. Whether you look at the words of the Buddha himself, the com­
mentaries and treatises written by the great scholars, the meaning the 
great meditators meditated upon, or the teachings of the Gelug, Sakya, 
Kagyu, or Nyingma schools, all of them teach just this lack of fixation 
and the realization of the nature of the mind. None of them teach any­
thing different. The teachings of all the Indian and Tibetan scholars 
and mahasiddhas all come to this one point. The actual practice of the 
Nyingma, Sakya, Kagyu, and Geluk lineages is all just this. What we 
actually practice, the foundation of our meditation, the essence of our 
samadhi, is nonfixation, which means resting in equipoise within the 
mind the way it is, not altering it. 
This is also something we need to know and understand for our­
selves. All of the buddhas have taught this, scholars have commented 
on it and explained it, and the great meditators have practiced it and 
given instructions on it. They did this so that we could know it thor­
oughly. The~e are two ways we can come to know it: through study 
and inference or by knowing it directly. The way we need to know 
it is through a direct yogic experience in meditation. We need to de-
144 
THE BENEFITS OF THE KUSULU'S MEDITATION 
velop the discernment that knows this. This discernment is not the 
intelligence of either listening or contemplation; it is the intelligence 
of meditation. 
Is just knowing it enough? It is not. The reason is that all sentient 
beings want to be happy. All sentient beings want to be free of suf­
fering. Because all sentient beings want to be happy and free of suffer­
ing, we need to point this out to others-to help them see that this 
is the Dharma that they, too, need to know. We should help them to 
develop interest in this. Once they have developed interest in it, we 
should teach them how to practice meditation and develop samadhi 
within themselves. This is the meaning you should understand and 
what you should point out to others. 
PUTTING IT INTO PRACTICE 
This completes the section that indicates that your body, 
speech, and mind are the Body, Speech, and Mind (of the 
victorious ones). 
Through the instructions in this section, we can realize that our 
own body is the same as the body of the Buddha, that our speech is 
the Buddha's speech, and that our mind is the wisdom mind of the 
Buddha. Our body is not the second-rate heap we normally think 
it is, but the body of the victorious ones, the essence of the creation 
stage. If we realize the nature of our own mind, we will see it as 
just that. We might think that our speech is nothing other than the 
amalgamation of all the unvirtuous things we say and that it just 
brings us problems. But if we realize the nature of the mind, we see 
that it is the essence of all the mantras. We normally think that our 
mind is under the control of the three poisons of greed, hatred, and 
delusion. But if we realize the nature of the mind, we see that it is the 
essence of the wisdom mind of all the buddhas. This is the benefit of 
seeing the nature of our mind. This is pointing out that the nature 
of our body is the essence of the creation stage; the nature of our 
speech is the essence of all mantra recitation, and the nature of 
our mind is the essence of the mind of all the buddhas. 
145 
THE RESTING MEDITATION OF A KUSULU 
Whatever practice we do-whether of the creation stage, comple­
tion stage, or any other type-the essence of the practice is to rest i':l 
our dharma nature as it is, to rest in our mind as it is. It is possible 
that you might misunderstand this point and think that anything 
else is unnecessary and that all we need to do is rest in the nature of 
mind. You might wonder why we should even bother with all the dif­
ferent practices and methods, such as gathering merit through being 
generous and so forth. When people heard these instructions, some 
of them misunderstood them. They thought Khenpo Gangshar was 
saying that all the other practices are unnecessary or even pointless. 
There is even a story about one monk who destroyed his cymbals 
because he thought that the only thing to do was meditate on the 
nature of the mind! But that is a mistake. Of course if you can get 
straight down to meditation without any further ado, that is wonder­
ful, but the practices of creation and completion, making offerings, 
and gathering merit are all helpful for your meditation. It is impor­
tant to do the other practices-they are necessary and beneficial, and 
you should do as many of them as you can. However, the practice that 
fulfills the essence of all the practices is just this meditation on the 
nature of the mind. 
What is important here is that we should not just leave it at simply 
knowing the nature of our mind: we need to practice it. When we 
practice meditating on the nature of our mind, sometimes we feel 
like everything is going very well and our meditation is exception­
ally clear. When that happens, however, we should not be overjoyed 
and attached to it. We should not think how wonderful our medita­
tion is. Other times we do not have any clear experience, but there is 
no need to be disappointed or depressed about that, either. There is 
no reason to think that we are terrible meditators or that we have lost 
our meditation. We should not think like that. 
What we should do is maintain strong mindfulness and awareness 
continuously, as Takpo Tashi Namgyal says in Clarifying the Natural 
State. While we are doing our meditation practice, we should main­
tain strong mindfulness and awareness. Then when we get up and 
do all the things we do after our meditation, we must not forget our 
mindfulness and awareness. Whether our meditation seems good or 
THE BENEFITS OF THE KUSULU'S MEDITATION 
bad, we need to keep it up continuously with mindfulness and aware­
ness. Many great meditators have said that a moment of confusion 
can lead to a hundred confusions: you get confused once, that leads 
to more confusion, which leads to more and more confusion; eventu­
ally you end up with a hundred different confusions. Or you might 
have one thought, which leads to another and another, and you end 
up with hundreds of thoughts. That is not what we want: we need to 
rely on strong mindfulness and awareness, and that will keep us from 
falling prey to confusion. 
And so that is how we need to practice. We need to recognize the 
nature of our mind and the nature of phenomena. Then we need to 
sustain this recognition with our mindfulness and awareness. Takpo 
Tashi Namgyal says this should not be a sporadic sort of mindfulness 
and awareness; what we need is vast and encompassing mindful­
ness and awareness. If our mindfulness is sporadic, it will not really 
help us. If our mindfulness and awareness are continuous, we will 
develop experience, and this will help us. Therefore the way we need 
to practice is to first contemplate what the nature of mind is like, 
and then come to know and experience what the nature of the mind 
is. Once we recognize the nature of the mind, we need to sustain 
that recognition. 
What is most important is to have conviction and faith in the 
Dharma. You should think to yourselves that you are receiving won­
derful instructions on the Dharma. You must have confidence. The 
second important point is that you should just rest in equipoise with­
out trying to do anything or alter anything. 
THE NATURE oF SIGHTS, SouNDS, 
AND THOUGHTS 
Khenpo Gangshar then cites a passage from Guru Rinpoche that also 
teaches the nature of the mind. The passage is from The Supplica­
tion in Seven Chapters, a well-known prayer that teaches the essential 
points of practice clearly and thoroughly, and that is frequently re­
cited in the Nyingma tradition.Jamgon Kongtrul Lodro Thaye found 
this passage particularly profound and helpful. He had been staying 
147 
THE RESTING MEDITATION OF A KUSULU 
with his master Situ Perna Nyinche, but it came time for him to leave, 
so he went to say good-bye to Situ Perna Nyinche, who was in re­
treat at the time, and asked for some instructions. Situ Perna Nyinche 
taught him this passage, which points out the nature of the body, 
speech, and mind, just once. Because of these instructions, Jamgon 
Kongtrul was able to realize the nature of his mind, as related in his 
life story. 
These powerful words bring great blessings. They describe how 
all the external objects-forms and sounds we perceive outside our­
selves-and all the thoughts that arise in our mind are aspects of our 
body, speech, and mind, and point out their nature. First he teaches 
that all that appears to our eyes is the body of the deity: 
Thus all the things that appear to your eyes, 
The outer and inner, the world and its inhabitants, 
Appear, so rest in the essence that has no self-clinging. 
Perceiver and perceived purified, the clear and empty 
body of the deity. 
I supplicate the lama who is naturally liberated desire. 
I supplicate Uddiyana Padmasambhava. 
When we look out, we see colors, shapes, mountains, and so forth. 
We see the environment of the outer world and its inhabitants. 
The environment we see includes all the mountains, valleys, rivers, 
forests, and so forth, and the inhabitants are the various different 
types of beings we see-people, fish, birds, and all the other sorts of 
animals and beings. When we see the environment and its inhabit­
ants, of course they do appear, but we should "rest in the essence 
that has no self-clinging." We should not think of them as being 
real things and cling to them. We should not think of them as being 
good or bad. We should not think they are something inherently 
real. We should not think they are nothing and emptiness. Instead, 
we should just rest within the unaltered mind itself without holding 
on to anything. If we just rest within the mind, the perceiver-our 
mind-and the perceived-external objects-are purified. There is 
nothing impure at all. We see them, but there is no clinging or at­
tachment, so clarity and emptiness are brought together and all we 
148 
THE BENEFITS OF THE KUSULU'S MEDITATION 
see becomes the body of the deity. It may not actually appear as the 
deity's body, but it is the essence of the deity's body. This is the same 
point Khenpo Gangshar discussed above about the body: not alter­
ing the body is the essence of the creation stage. If we can recognize 
this, it is "the clear and empty body of the deity." In this state we have 
no clinging or attachment to the world or its inhabitants; although 
they naturally appear, we rest in meditation without fixation, so we 
"supplicate the lama who is naturally liberated desire." We suppli­
cate Uddiyana Padmasambhava, or Guru Rinpoche, so that we can 
be free of all attachment and realize the nonexistence of the per­
ceiver and perceived. This is liberating our own body as the body of 
the deity. 
The prayer goes on to address the aspect of speech: 
Thus all the sounds that resound in your ears, 
To which you cling as pleasant or unpleasant, 
Sound emptily, so rest in the nature with no thinking. 
Empty resounding, the Buddha's speech with no arising 
or ceasing. 
I supplicate the empty resounding Victors' speech. 
I supplicate Uddiyana Padmasambhava. 
When we hear with our ears, we hear various different sounds. Some 
of them are pleasant, such as beautiful melodies. But sometimes we 
hear unpleasant sounds, such as ugly tunes that we do not like. When 
we hear words, they may not have a melody, but in terms of meaning, 
they may be harsh and unpleasant, or their meaning may sometimes 
be attractive and pleasing. In this way, we cling to the many differ­
ent sounds that we hear as pleasant or unpleasant, but in actuality 
they "sound emptily, so rest in the nature with no thinking." This 
means that although they sound and we can hear them, we cannot 
prove their nature to be anything. Therefore if they are pleasant, we 
should not cling to them, thinking they are nice. If they are harsh 
and unpleasant, we should not feel aversion to them, thinking they 
are bad. Thus they are just empty resounding: we hear them, but 
they are empty of any essence. Because they are empty, in their es­
sence they neither arise nor cease, like the speech of all the buddhas. 
149 
THE RESTING MEDITATION OF A KUSULU 
But even though they are empty, they resound; at the same time as 
they resound, they are empty. When we can see that nature, that is the 
essence of the speech of all the buddhas. 
Next is the mind and mental perceptions: 
Thus all the thoughts that move before the mind, 
The afflictions, the five poisons, whatever occurs, 
Don't need to be anticipated, analyzed, or altered. 
By letting their motion alone, you are freed into the 
Dharmakaya. 
I supplicate the lama of self-liberated awareness. 
I supplicate Uddiyana Padmasambhava. 
We have many different thoughts that occur as the objects of our 
mental consciousness. Sometimes they are good thoughts, and some­
times they are thoughts motivated by the afflictions, the five poisons. 
When the Buddha called the afflictions poisons, this was a skillful 
way to tell us that they must be given up. The five poisons are the 
afflictions of greed, aversion, delusion, jealousy, and pride. When one 
of these arises, we should not think of it as good and follow it. But 
we should not think of it as bad or as something we need to stop and 
alter or get rid of either. We should not engage the afflictions by anti­
cipating: we do not need to think, "This going to happen. I'm going 
to feel desire in a moment." Nor do we need to constantly analyze 
and rehash all of our thoughts. We do not need to change them in 
any way or try to make bad thoughts good. Instead, we should just 
let them alone. If we just let the motion of the mind settle, then it 
naturally stops because its nature is emptiness. This is the naturally 
self-liberated awareness, the nature of our mind. Because it is empty 
by nature and cannot be established as anything, it is freed into the 
dharmakaya. 
The nature of our mind is awareness, and awareness is naturally 
liberated. We do not need to do anything to it. We do not need to 
think of it as something to take up that we need to get more of, nor 
do we need to think of it as something bad to be blocked or sup­
pressed. We should understand that it is naturally liberated. These are 
instructions on using what appears to our mind for our samadhi. 
THE BENEFITS OF THE KUSULU'S MEDITATION 
The next verse summarizes how our bodies, speech, and minds are 
naturally empty: 
The purity of what is perceived outside-the appearance 
of the object, 
The liberation of what perceives from the inside-the 
mind-essence, 
And the clear radiance between: within the recognition 
of this, 
May the compassion of the sugatas of the three times 
Liberate the mind streams of those who are like me. 
In terms of outside appearances, there are perceived objects. They do 
appear, but their appearance is pure-they are naturally empty of 
essence. If we realize that they are naturally empty and pure, there is 
no way external objects can harm us because their essence is empty. 
In terms of what is inside, there is our perceiving mind, but that, too, 
cannot be established and is empty of essence. For that reason, it is 
naturally free of thoughts and afflictions. Thus the mind-essence is 
naturally liberated. Between the internal perceiving mind and the 
external perceived object there is clarity, which is the luminosity or 
clear radiance of the mind. That is neither the external object nor the 
internal mind. This clear radiance is the nature of our mind, and we 
need to recognize it. 
External objects and the internal perceiving mind are both nat­
urally pure and naturally empty. But even though they are empty, 
there is not just an inanimate, blank void. They are clear: by their 
very nature, they can manifest as qualities and wisdom. The prayer 
is that when we recognize this clear radiance and these natures, 
the compassion and blessings of all the buddhas of the three times 
bring us to liberation where we have no clinging or attachment. 
This is what it means to recognize the Buddha's body, speech, and 
mind. Our bodies are the bodies of the all the buddhas; our speech 
is the speech of the buddhas; our minds are the wisdom mind of the 
buddhas' dharmakaya. If we can realize the way that these are, we 
will be liberated immediately. 
The great treatise The Supreme Continuum says that buddha nature 
THE RESTING MEDITATION OF A KUSULU 
is present within the mind streams of all sentient beings. We all have 
the nature of the mind, but not all sentient beings can experience 
or recognize it. This is taught through nine analogies, including the 
analogy of a statue of a buddha hidden in a lotus flower. One of the 
analogies is of a large piece of gold that falls to the ground and over 
the course of hundreds and thousands of years is covered by dirt, lit­
ter, and filth. The essence of the gold itself does not change in any way, 
but it is no longer particularly useful. Later a poor man comes and 
builds a shack on top of the gold. He lea~s an impoverished, miser­
able life full of suffering, but actually, there is no need for that-there 
is a huge piece of gold right below his house. But the gold does not 
help him in any way. 
Then a clairvoyant person comes along and sees how difficult and 
miserable a life the poor man leads. But he also sees that it does not 
have to be like that. If the poor man just dug a bit beneath his shack, 
he would find the gold, which he could use to end his suffering. So 
the clairvoyant tells the poor man that there is gold and that he can 
use it. If there were no gold, the clairvoyant person could not help the 
poor man. But the gold is there. Even though the gold is there, if the 
clairvoyant person did not point it out, there would be no way to use 
it. Both of these conditions must be fulfilled. 
As in this analogy, the nature of our mind is the cause for us to rid 
ourselves of all the afflictions and develop all the qualities of reali­
zation. It is present within all sentient beings, but like the poor man 
we do not know it is there. Because we do not know it is there, we 
fall under the control of the afflictions of greed, aversion, delusion, 
pride, jealousy, and so forth. We experience the different types of suf. 
fering of the six realms of wandering beings. We encounter many 
difficulties and obstacles and are unable to achieve liberation and 
omniscience. Actually, there is no need for us to suffer. All of us sen­
tient beings have what is called buddha nature in the great treatise 
The Supreme Continuum and called the nature of the mind in these 
instructions. We have it, but we do not know that we have it. 
Like the clairvoyant person, the complete and perfect Buddha first 
taught that buddha nature is present within the mind streams of all 
sentient beings. This teaching was passed down through all the lin-
THE BENEFITS OF THE KUSULU'S MEDITATION 
eage lamas to our root lama, who points the nature of mind out to us. 
If we put effort into it, understand it, and know it, we will gradually 
be able to free ourselves from the affiictions that must be abandoned. 
We will gradually develop the qualities and wisdom that must be 
realized. As a result of this, we will no longer experience the suffering 
of samsara and the lower realms. This is why we need to know that 
our mind is not far away-it is close. Its nature has been present from 
beginningless time. Gold can be buried for hundreds or thousands 
of years, but its essence never changes. In the same way, the essence 
of our mind or buddha nature never changes. It is right there for us 
to know. 
153 
12 
DISTINGUISHING MIND 
AND AWARENESS 
THE RESTING MEDITATION of a kusulu is like the essence of all 
the traditions of Dharma. It is the essence of the great seal, the 
great perfection, path and result, and emptiness. It is necessary to 
receive these instructions, but once you have received· them, what 
should you do with them? There is a danger of what we call not 
taking care of your medi~ation. If you receive the instructions and 
start meditating but then do not keep it up, you will lose your 
meditation and revert back to your old bad habits. When you re­
ceive such experiential meditation instructions, you absolutely 
must practice· them. 
In terms of how to practice them, the three forefathers of the Kagyu 
lineage-Marpa the Translator, Milarepa, and Gampopa-provide 
examples of different ways in which we can practice. They allied dif.. 
ferent lifestyles in different situations, and so they serve as examples 
of the different ways that students can live and practice Dharma ac­
cording to their own needs and inclinations. 
Lord Gampopa Youthful Moonlight, for example, led the life of a 
fully ordained monk. He took monastic vows, built a large temple, 
and took care of a large sangha while at the same time managing to 
maintain his practice of mahamudra and meditation on the nature of 
the mind-essence. By doing so, he was able to achieve a state of great 
accomplishment, demonstrating that we, too, can achieve this state if 
154 
DISTINGUISHING MIND AND AWARENESS 
we lead a monastic life. This path is beneficial for those people who 
have the inclination to fully renounce the worldly life: it provides a 
good opportunity to practice the Dharma. 
But many Dharma students are not able to become monastics, and 
they might wonder whether they can practice the Dharma without 
becoming a monk or a nun. There is no one who says that you can't 
practice the Dharma if you don't take vows. For example, the great 
yogi Milarepa was not a monk, but he practiced the Dharma very 
intensely. He led an uncomplicated and austere life. He did not worry 
about food, clothing, money, or a place to stay. He did not have even 
a whit of attachment to this life. If he had food while he practiced 
meditation, that was fine. If he did not have food, that also was fine. 
If he had clothing, that was fine, and if he did not have clothing, 
that also was fine-he practiced diligently regardless of external cir­
cumstances in caves and other remote places, and he became a great 
mahasiddha. If you have the fortune and ability to practice like Mila­
repa, that is wonderful. If you do not have the fortune or ability to 
do it to the extent that Milarepa did but can do even a little bit, that 
is also wonderful. 
Not everyone has the opportunity to practice in such a way, but no 
one says that you cannot practice the Dharma and achieve results if 
you do not practice exactly like Milarepa. Whatever lifestyle you lead, 
you can still practice Dharma. Marpa the Translator, for example, led 
an entirely different life. He had a wife and children, wealth and pos­
sessions. He enjoyed those, but at the same time he was diligent about 
his Dharma practice. He first studied and contemplated the Dharma, 
and then practiced it. Through his practice he achieved the great ac­
complishments of the Dharma. He is like the spring from which all 
of our Kagyu teachings flow. 
Like Marpa the Translator, you probably live in a household 
and have a certain amount of wealth, but you can still practice the 
Dharma. If you can practice like Marpa and attain such a high degree 
of realization, then that is extremely fortunate. Even if you cannot 
attain such a high degree of realization, any amount of Dharma prac­
tice you do will still be beneficial. Whether you take Marpa, Milarepa, 
or Gampopa as your model, you can practice the Dharma. 
155 
THE RESTING MEDITATION OF A KUSULU 
The great masters of ancient India, the eighty-four mahasiddhas, 
also provide many different examples of different lifestyles. The 
mahasiddhas came from all walks of life: they were male and female 
masters who practiced the Dharma in ways that fit with their life­
styles and managed to achieve great accomplishments. Among them 
was King Indrabhuti, who was a powerful king. He had a large king­
dom over which he reigned, and therefore had great responsibilities. 
He was also extremely wealthy and had many sensory pleasures to 
enjoy. But he was not led astray by his pleasures and wealth, nor was 
he overwhelmed by his responsibilities. He was able to do his prac­
tice while keeping up his responsibilities and attained realization in 
this way. · 
Like King Indrabhuti, you might have great wealth and resources. 
Sometimes you might wonder to yourself whether you have to give it 
all up in order to practice Dharma. That is not necessary. If you wish 
to give up your wealth, that is fine, but if you do not, you can still 
practice the Dharma and achieve results. 
The great pandita Nagarjuna provides yet another example. Nagar­
juna was learned and wise, and knew the philosophies of both 
Buddhist and non-Buddhist schools. He also was extremely intelli­
gent and proved his points through sharp and penetrating logic. He 
composed many original treatises, which were so influential that they 
mark a turning point in both Buddhist and non-Buddhist philoso­
phy. The logic and reasoning in Nagarjuna's profound treatises on 
emptiness were so overpowering that Buddhists were compelled to 
accept his positions, and there is even said to be a marked difference 
between the treatises written by non-Buddhist philosophers who ap­
peared before Nagarjuna and those who came after him. His logic 
was so persuasive that they were forced to change the positions they 
held in their own philosophical schools. In his treatises, he refuted 
many incorrect positions and established a new tradition of schol­
arship. But he was not merely a scholar who only took a scholastic 
interest and never practiced, distracted by his intellectual pursuits. 
Because of his realization of the profound nature of emptiness, he 
was both a great scholar and a mahasiddha. Similarly, there are many 
people today who are scholars, such as professors. The example of 
DISTINGUISHING MIND AND AWARENESS 
Nagarjuna shows that you can pursue scholarly work and practice 
meditation at the same time. 
Another example is someone who was neither a great scholar nor 
wealthy or powerful in any way, and who led a very simple life. This 
is the great mahasiddha Tilopa. He supported himself by pound­
ing sesame seeds to extract the oil. Externally, he made the efforts of 
grinding sesame seeds, and internally, at the same time, he practiced 
mahamudra, through which he attained great accomplishments. You 
might wonder whether you could lead such a simple life and practice 
the Dharma, and the example ofTilopa shows that you can. You can 
live and practice like Tilopa and also achieve the ultimate result. 
Whatever our lifestyle may be, we need to practice the Dharma. But 
how do we actually fit the practice into our lives? In general, there are 
two parts to Dharma practice: the actual practice of resting in equi­
poise, and postmeditation practice. The actual practice of meditation 
involves requesting teachings from a master, developing faith and de­
votion, and then doing either the analytic meditation of the pandita 
or the resting meditation of the kusulu. When we have not yet discov­
ered the nature of our mind and are unable to experience its essence, 
we should practice the analytic meditation of the pandita. When we 
have progressed through this preliminary of an analytic meditation 
and our minds are mostly able to rest in equipoise, we do not need 
to always look for where our mind is or what its essence is. At some 
point you start having some experience, and that is when you should 
do the resting meditation of the kusulu. If you are able to rest within 
that meditation, that is good, but if not you can return to the analytic 
meditation for a while. Once your meditation progresses and you are 
able to simply rest, then you should just sustain the resting medita­
tion of the kusulu. 
We need to do both of these practices, but that alone is not enough. 
We also need to practice in our postmeditation activities. When­
ever we get up from meditation, we do things. We might eat, sleep, 
go someplace, or do any number of things. The time when we are 
doing all these things other than meditation is what we call post­
meditation. The most important thing to do in postmeditation is 
to not forget the experience of meditation, resting in equipoise. We 
157 
THE RESTING MEDITATION OF A KUSULU 
should try to maintain our mindfulness and awareness. If we can do 
that, our postmeditation will enhance our actual meditation prac­
tice, and our meditation practice will enhance our postmeditation 
practice. Our equipoise will grow clearer and more stable and we will 
also have somewhat fewer difficulties in postmeditation. Of course 
we still have to see people, have conversations, and do our jobs in 
postmeditation, and it is possible that there will be worries and prob­
lems. But when problems occur, we shouldn't give up. We must be 
able to remember the essence of our meditation practice, and once 
we remember it we need to think about it. If we practice both medi­
tation and postmeditation in this way, things will get clearer and bet­
ter. Khenpo Gangshar said that this is the essence of his instructions 
on simple and uncomplicated practice. 
THE PROBLEM WITH DISTRACTION 
At this point we need to be able to know whether our meditation is 
going well or badly. In order to be able to know that, we need to know 
whether we are distracted or not, and so in his shorter instructions 
Khenpo Gangshar says that we need to distinguish between being 
distracted and not being distracted. Sometimes when we are medi­
tating on the nature of the mind, we get a little distracted, but other 
times we can rest without distraction. We need to be able to clearly 
differentiate these two situations. Khenpo Gangshar continues, 
If you are undistracted and natural, there can be neither 
help nor harm. This is awareness. 
If we can eliminate distraction and rest naturally undistracted with 
the naked and direct experience of the essence of the mind, noth­
ing can either help or harm us: if something good happens we will 
not get attached to it so it cannot really help us. If someone does 
something bad to us we will not feel any anger over it, so it cannot 
really harm us. This is what it means to say that there is neither help 
nor harm. 
In dzogchen, this is called distinguishing between mind and 
awareness. Being undistracted and resting naturally is what we 
DISTINGUISHING MIND AND AWARENESS 
call awareness. Being distracted by thoughts is what we call mind. 
When we say distinguishing, what we mean is that we need to know 
whether our meditation is good or not. This comes down to mind 
and awareness, so we need to be able to distinguish between these 
two. As Khenpo Gangshar says: 
It is very important to distinguish the difference between 
mind and awareness. 
Sometimes we look at the nature of the mind, recognize it, and rest 
within it. That is called awareness. But sometimes we forget what 
we're doing and many different thoughts arise. These thoughts well 
up because of the imprints of habituation from beginningless time. 
When we are unable to rest in equipoise and there is some confusion, 
or when we forget what we are doing, that is mind. These are the two 
aspects we need to differentiate. If we confuse them, there is a danger 
that we will mistake not meditating for meditating and our practice 
will not go well. We need to clearly distinguish what is meditation 
and what is not meditation. When are we distracted and not meditat­
ing? When are we undistracted and meditating? Clearly knowing the 
difference between these two is very important. 
The reason this is so important is as the Great Omniscient One, 
Longchenpa, described: 
The big oxen pretending to know ati nowadays 
Claim that discursive thinking is awakened mind. 
Such ignorant people, in their realm of darkness, 
Are far away from the meaning of the natural Great 
Perfection. 
Although many people think they are practicing atiyoga or dzogchen, 
many of them do not know how to differentiate between mind 
and awareness. Such people are actually just big, stupid. oxen­
bullheaded and dumb. If they try to meditate, they don't know how. 
They don't know what is good and what is bad. When such people 
practice dzogchen, a thought happens and then they follow it, think­
ing that the movement of thoughts in the mind is all ultimate bodhi­
chitta. They think it is the dharma nature, the way the mind-essence 
159 
THE RESTING MEDITATION OF A KUSULU 
is: they think they have realized the nature of all phenomena. But 
this is a big mistake. Actually, all of these discursive thoughts circling 
through their minds are the confused appearances of samsara, not ul­
timate bodhichitta, and to think they are wisdom or ultimate bodhi­
chitta is actually complete delusion. People who think they are in 
the midst of darkness. They lack clarity. If they could come to a place 
where it was clear and light, they would be able to see and to free 
themselves, but they do not know this and instead wander about in 
the confused darkness of delusion. This is why they are said to be far 
away from the natural great perfection-they are unable to practice 
dzogchen meditation. 
This is the difficulty that can arise if we do not distinguish between 
mind and awareness-between the distracted and undistracted mind. 
In addition to recognizing the nature of the mind, we also need to 
know when we are experiencing resting in awareness of the nature of 
mind and when we are experiencing mind, the confused aspect. 
The reason we need to distinguish mind from awareness is that 
there is a nondistracted aspect that recognizes the nature of mind 
and a distracted aspect that has forgotten its nature. When we rest 
within the nature of mind, that is what Khenpo Gangshar calls "the 
continuity of undistracted naturalness," but when we get distracted, 
we forget that experience and lose it. Then many thoughts arise and 
the mind becomes unclear. It is as if we don't know when we got 
distracted. In some meditation manuals, this is called the undercur­
rent. There are small thoughts that start without us knowing how or 
when. This distracted aspect is called mind. The undistracted mind 
that has mindfulness and attentiveness-the continuity of undis­
tracted naturalness-is called awareness. 
Above we used the word mind when discussing looking at the na­
ture of mind, and here we are using mind for the distracted aspect 
that must be given up. Although the word is the same, the mean­
ing is different. In this context, mind is when experience has not yet 
arisen within ourselves, or if experience has arisen, it is when we fall 
under the control of thoughts. Above, looking at the nature of the 
mind means recognizing the mind itself and knowing its utterly pure 
160 
DISTINGUISHING MIND AND AWARENESS 
nature. We need to realize that these are different. Resting in equi­
poise undistracted within the recognition of the nature of the mind 
is what we call awareness. 
To put it concisely, awareness is unconfused-it is what realizes 
the nature of things. When we have confusion or thinking, that is 
mind. We need to clearly differentiate these two because, as Khenpo 
Gangshar says: 
If you fail to distinguish between mind and awareness you 
may engage in conduct which confuses cause and result 
and thus turn away from the path in which view and con­
duct are united. 
Sometimes our awareness is very strong and clear, and at such times 
there is no danger of mixing up karma, cause, and effect. But some­
times when we do not clearly distinguish the confusion of mind 
from awareness, we might think that the distracted aspect of mind 
is meditation. Many thoughts will arise, and we will not deal with 
them, thinking that this is dzogchen. If that happens, the afflictions 
will arise, we will follow them, and then we will engage in wrong­
doing. We will have turned away from the path in which view and 
conduct are united. We will disregard karma, cause, and effect. We 
will not give up nonvirtue and will not cultivate virtue. We will con­
fuse cause and effect, and make many mistakes. When we have the 
right view and understand the difference between mind and aware­
ness, this leads us to good behavior-proper view and proper con­
duct are united. But if we do not distinguish between them and do 
not behave well, it is the opposite: our view and conduct will not 
be good. 
When we meditate on the nature of the mind, we need to have both 
right view and right conduct. It is very important that we achieve 
a proper understanding of the view and that we realize the mind­
essence. At the same time, our conduct should be proper; it should 
not be mixed with misdeeds, obscurations, and nonvirtue. When our 
view and conduct are united, our good view enhances our conduct, 
and our conduct enhances the view. When we are meditating, we 
161 
THE RESTING MEDITATION OF A KUSULU 
need to follow this unified path, but if we are not able to differentiate 
mind from awareness, we will turn away from the path. 
RECOGNIZING AWARENESS, 
IDENTIFYING MIND 
We need to differentiate mind from awareness, but what is mind? 
What is awareness? Khenpo Gangshar explains: 
When experiencing the continuity of undistracted natu­
ralness, awareness is free from a reference point, like sky, 
without even a speck of joy or sorrow, hope or fear, ben­
efit or harm, whether you meet with positive or negative 
conditions. 
Awareness is when our mind is undistracted-when we recognize 
the nature of our mind as it is and realize its essence. In the instruc­
tions on mahamudra, we say that we need to have mindfulness and 
attentiveness and not let our mind become distracted. When we call 
this naturalness, that means that we are resting in the nature of how 
things are: it is seeing the nature of mind. When we see the nature 
of mind, what feelings do we have? We might meet at some point 
with positive conditions when everything is going well and things 
are nice and pleasant, but we do not feel any joy, any great hope, 
or any clinging. We might meet with negative conditions-things 
might go badly, we might feel pain and suffering, or encounter dif.. 
ficulties and things we do not like. But we do not feel any anger or 
aversion toward these things. 
When we are resting in this samadhi, if positive conditions arise 
we do not think to ourselves, "That's good; and feel happy. Likewise, 
if negative conditions arise, we do not think, "That's bad," and get 
depressed. We have neither joy nor displeasure. If we were to feel joy 
or pleasure when meeting with positive conditions, we would feel a 
lot of hope, and if we felt sad or depressed about negative conditions, 
we would become fearful. But when resting in equipoise within the 
natural state, there is neither any hope nor any fear. When we say 
"hope or fear," hope is thinking, "I hope things turn out well in the 
DISTINGUISHING MIND AND AWARENESS 
future" and fear is thinking, "I'm afraid that in the future things are 
going to go badly." But here there is not even a trace of either of 
these feelings. 
Everything is the same, tranquil and peaceful, and we rest within 
this state. When we encounter good situations, they cannot really 
benefit us in that they do not make us happy or give us any hope. 
When we encounter bad situations, they do not harm us in that they 
do not make us fearful or give us any problems. We do not have 
any of the difficulties that arise from hope and fear; we don't have 
any clinging or attachment. It is like the sky or space, without even 
a speck of joy or sorrow, hope or fear, benefit or harm. There is no 
clinging and no fear at all. This is what the awareness is-a very 
clear and stable state during meditation in which we experience ra­
diant, blissful emptiness. 
Well then, what is mind? 
The character of (dualistic) mind is evident the moment 
you get slightly distracted and encounter (the same) condi­
tions and you feel joy or sorrow. Having given rise to joy or 
sorrow, you will accumulate karmic actions. 
We try to rest undistracted within the experience of the nature of 
the mind, but we have old habits and sometimes do get slightly dis­
tracted. This means that we have lost our mindfulness and attentive­
ness. In dzogchen, this is called mind, and in mahamudra it is said 
that our mindfulness is not stable. When we get slightly distracted, 
thoughts can arise in our mind, some of which will be of like or dis­
like, and we will then forget to rest in naturalness. Our mind gets 
distracted and confused. If we encounter a good situation, we feel 
happy and joyful. We think, "How nice! I like that! I want that!" and 
we then feel attached. Because of that, we perform an action and ac­
cumulate karma. If we encounter a bad situation, we think, "How 
horrid! Get that away from me," and feel aversion or jealousy, which 
also leads us to act. Once we feel either attachment or aversion, we 
will commit good or bad actions and accumulate karma. This then 
causes us to wander in samsara-once we accumulate karma, we will 
inevitably wander in samsara. Such distraction is mind. 
THE RESTING MEDITATION OF A KUSULU 
This is how we identify mind and awareness. Awareness is nondis­
traction imbued with mindfulness and attentiveness. If mindfulness 
and attentiveness are absent, that is mind. Khenpo Gangshar gives an 
example: 
For example, mind is like the clouds gathering in the sky. 
Therefore, you must gain stability in awareness, which is 
like a cloudless sky. You must be able to purify the aspect of 
mind that is like the clouds in the sky. 
Through this you will be able to separate mind and 
awareness. 
When the sky is cloudy, it is hidden and you cannot see it clearly. 
Similarly, when we encounter a situation, we have feelings of joy or 
sorrow, and as a result of this we experience attachment and aversion. 
But our internal awareness is like an utterly clear blue sky without 
a trace of a cloud. The absence of mind is .called awareness. At first 
our awareness is not stable-sometimes it is there and sometimes it 
is not. We need to gain stability in this awareness, which means that 
we need to be able to sustain it. In order to do that, we need to purify 
the mind: just as a strong wind will blow away all the clouds in the 
sky, we need to use the strength of samadhi to purify ourselves of 
the clouds of mind so that we can see the awareness-it should be 
crystal clear. When we have mind, there is distraction. But if we have 
mindfulness, we realize that we were distracted, and the distraction 
immediately disappears. Once mind has been stabilized, awareness 
anses. 
The main point is that we must be able to maintain our experi­
ence and realization. We need to be able to get rid of the problems in 
our meditation. In order to do that we need to know what mind and 
awareness are and identify them clearly. We need to make sure we are 
not overcome by mind and be able to rest evenly within our aware­
ness. We need to dispel our thoughts, the clouds gathering in the sky; 
we need to dispel the distraction of mind and make our awareness 
clear like the utterly pure sky. 
Some dzogchen practitioners say that mahamudra lacks these in­
structions on differentiating between mind and awareness and con-
DISTINGUISHING MIND AND AWARENESS 
sider this to be a deficiency in mahamudra. But this is not actually the 
case. Although masters of mahamudra do not teach it using the same 
words, they do teach the same point. In Clarifying the Natural State, 
Takpo Tashi Namgyal says that when we are practicing meditation, 
we need to have clear and strong mindfulness and attentiveness. This 
actually means the same thing as differentiating mind and awareness. 
The way we determine whether we are distracted or not is through 
our mindfulness and attentiveness. Takpo Tashi Namgyal says from 
his own experience that this mindfulness should be clear and strong 
so that we immediately know if our meditation is good. Our mind­
fulness must have a certain strength and force to it. If our mindful­
ness is too lax, it is easy to become distracted. Thus the teachings on 
dzogchen and mahamudra are really making the same point, albeit 
with different words. 
The reason it is the same is that when we discuss differentiating 
mind and awareness, we are looking at the object of the meditation 
and saying, "This is mind" or "This is awareness." When we say that 
we need strong and clear mindfulness and attentiveness, then we are 
looking at the perceiving subject with mindfulness and attentiveness 
to see whether it is confused or not. This is a way of distinguishing 
between mind and awareness. When we have strong and clear mind­
fulness and awareness, we are able to purify our minds and clarify 
our awareness. In this way, although the mahamudra instructions do 
not actually say the words "distinguishing mind and awareness," they 
do teach the meaning, so there is no deficiency. 
There are also some manuals that say mindfulness and attentive­
ness are distraction and are therefore not all that good. But in order 
to be undistracted, you absolutely must have mindfulness and atten­
tiveness. Takpo Tashi Namgyal also says that our mindfulness and 
attentiveness should not be too fussy, to put it in colloquial language; 
we should not be constantly fiddling with our meditation. Instead, 
we should maintain our experienc~ in a spacious way. If we think, 
"I need to be mindful!" that is too tight. But if we look from afar 
in a relaxed way, then our mindfulness will be supple and spacious. 
Our mind should be able to rest without distraction in mindfulness. 
Always fiddling and being fussy does not really help much. 
165 
THE RESTING MEDITATION OF A KUSULU 
This concludes the teachings on the actual practice of the rest­
ing meditation of the kusulu, which began with the instructions on 
resolving, followed by these instructions on distinguishing. The in­
structions on resting meditation tell us that we are able to look at our 
mind. When we look, we can see and then realize its nature. Then we 
need to be able to sustain that: we need to maintain our practice. In 
order to do that, we need to distinguish between mind and aware­
ness. Thus we must be able to purify mind and strengthen and clarify 
awareness. The nature of our mind is not something that we make 
or that someone else gives to us. The nature of mind is already pres­
ent within and is something that we can recognize and meditate on. 
We don't need to make something that's not resting rest. We don't 
need to make something moving stay still. The resting meditation is 
just to rest in meditation within that which we already have, relaxing 
without altering it in any way. It is important that we nurture this 
continually. 
166 
PART FOUR 
FOLLOWING 
THROUGH IN 
OUR LIVES 
WHEN WE HAVE REALIZED THE NATURE OF THE MIND AS IT 
is, how can we use that realization to take the situations we encoun­
ter as the path and help ourselves in our human lives? Sometimes we 
experience disturbing emotions and the afflictions, and when that 
happens, how should we use our practice? When we get sick, how 
should we use our practice? When we come to the time of death, how 
can we bring our practice to really bear upon the important points? 
The instructions that tell us what to do in these situations are the fol­
low-through instructions on taking situations as the path. 
The follow-through instructions on taking situations as the path 
are extremely important. We will encounter many situations both 
happy and sad, and when we do, we need to be able to make our prac­
tice help us. If we can do this, it is very beneficial. Marpa the Transla­
tor called this mixing-mixing joy and suffering with our practice. 
Here we call it taking situations as the path. This means that what­
ever we encounter, we need to be able to take it as our path. When 
bad things happen to us and we encounter difficulties and problems, 
we need to use them as a way to strengthen our experience and re­
alization. When good things happen, we need them to increase our 
experience and realization. We also need to avoid being overcome by 
our afflictions and difficulties. 
Khenpo Gangshar's instructions describe four different applica­
tions. First he describes taking joy and sorrow as the path; second, 
taking sickness as the path; third, taking the afflictions as the path; 
and lastly, taking the bardo and sleep as the path. 
168 
13 
TAKING THE 
SITUATIONS OF OUR 
LIVES AS THE PATH 
WE NEED TO TAKE ALL the problems we encounter as the path 
so that they do not really hurt us in this life. What is the 
method for doing this? The principal method is to maintain the 
experience of the nature of the mind so that they will be unable 
to harm us. This is something we need to be able to do. Khenpo 
Gangshar writes: 
The third part explains the profound advice on the subse­
quent application, which is based on the oral instructions 
that reveal direct self-liberation. 
Self-liberation refers to what we discussed above in the context of 
Wangchuk Dorje's Ocean of Certainty: .appearances are mind, mind 
is empty, emptiness is spontaneous presence, and spontaneous pres­
ence is self-liberation. Here we are discussing the natural liberation 
of all thoughts: when a thought a~;"ises and we recognize its nature, it 
is naturally liberated. 
Khenpo Gangshar explains the reason for taking things as the path 
as follows: 
While you remain in undistracted naturalness it is utterly 
impossible to accumulate karma and you have cut the 
FOLLOWING THROUGH IN OUR LIVES 
stream of the further accumulation of karma. Although 
you are not accumulating (new) karma, do not get the idea 
that there is neither good nor evil to be experienced as 
(past) karma ripens. 
When you rest undistracted within the realization of the nature of 
your mind, whether during the equipoise of meditation practice or 
during postmeditation practice, you cannot accumulate new good 
or bad karma because you are not experiencing any clinging or any 
aversion. Because you do not have any clinging, aversion, or other af­
flictions, you do not perform any actions with karmic consequences, 
and so you will no longer accumulate new karma. As Nagarjuna said, 
Desire, aversion, and delusion-
These three produce unvirtuous acts. 
Non greed, nonhatred, nondelusion­
The acts that these produce are virtuous. 
If desire, aversion, or delusion arise in the mind, then we will natu­
rally accumulate unvirtuous karma. But when we have experience 
and realization, there is none of that, so it is impossible to accumu­
late karma. 
When we practice dzogchen or mahamudra, there is no more 
karma. You might think this means that you will never be affected 
by the ripening of karma again, but that is not how it is: "Do not get 
the idea that there is neither good nor evil to be experienced as past 
karma does ripen." The fact that we are not accumulating new karma 
means that we are not creating new causes for rebirth in samsara and 
the lower realms, but that does not mean that we will not experience 
the results of the actions we have already performed. 
Or you might think that now you can perform actions and accu­
mulate karma without being affected by their ripening. But saying 
there is no more karma does not mean that we can do things, ac­
cumulate karma, and then just rest within the nature of the mind 
and not experience any consequences. It does not work like that. We 
cannot commit an unvirtuous act and then think, "Since I have real­
ized the nature of my mind, I won't experience the karmic results of 
TAKING THE SITUATIONS OF OUR LIVES AS THE PATH 
this act." We are not freed from virtue and nonvirtue. What it means 
instead is that because of our realization we do not accumulate new 
karma, but past karma will ripen upon us. We will experience the 
results of the good and bad acts we have done in the past. That is why 
we need to purify our karma: 
That is, unless you purify all the karmic deeds you have pre­
viously accumulated through confession, purification, and 
so forth, they will ripen without fail. The ripening of karma 
is still possible. 
In the past, we had not yet realized the nature of mind, because of 
which we accumulated karma. This karma will definitely ripen upon 
us. Therefore we need to purify our misdeeds by confessing them or by 
accumulating merit, the strength of which will purify our misdeeds. 
We can eliminate our misdeeds and afflictions through either of these 
methods, but unless we purify our karma through them, they will 
ripen without fail. We should not doubt this. The full ripening of our 
karma will happen. Our virtuous acts will bring us pleasant results; 
unvirtuous or negative acts will bring us painful results. Although we 
do not accumulate new karma when we have attained the realization 
of the nature of mind, we still experience the ripening of past karma. 
Since we will definitely experience the ripening of unpurified karma, 
we need instructions to help us deal with it. That is why Khenpo Gang­
shar gave these instructions on taking situations as the path. 
When the results of our karma ripen, how will we experience them? 
Karma ripens either upon our bodies or upon our mind. As Khenpo 
Gangshar says: 
This ripening will manifest in your body or mind and no­
where else. When it ripens in your body you will fall sick. 
When it ripens in your mind you will feel joy or sorrow 
and the thoughts of the six types of disturbing emotions 
will arise. 
Our karmic actions do not ripen on objects outside ourselves-the 
earth, mountains, rocks, or anything else. They do not ripen in any 
other realm or any other place. They do not ripen upon our friends 
171 
FOLLOWING THROUGH IN OUR LIVES 
or relatives. They do not ripen on anyone who did not perform the 
act. The acts we perform will only ripen on us-on our own bodies 
and minds. 
When our actions ripen on our bodies, we experience the results 
of unvirtuous acts as sickness, pain, or some other sort of physical 
discomfort. We experience the results of defiled virtue as pleasurable 
feelings or comfort. Defiled virtuous karma means the virtuous ac­
tions that we perform either at times when we do not recognize the 
nature of the mind or at times when we do not have the motivation 
of bodhichitta. These are virtuous acts that bring about temporary 
results. We do these actions out of a kind heart and they do bring a 
happy result, but that happy result is a good rebirth in this world­
within samsara. 
When our actions ripen on our mind, we might feel joy or sor­
row. If the action was defiled virtue, we experience its result as men­
tal pleasure or happiness. If it was an unvirtuous act, it will ripen 
as suffering, unpleasantness, or mental pain. Therefore defiled good 
actions lead to comfort and pleasure in our body and mind; unvirtu­
ous acts bring pain, illness, and discomfort. This is how it works. 
Therefore much of the joy, suffering, and illness that we experience 
is the result of our past karmic actions. This then often causes us to 
experience the six afflictions. We cling to an afflicted sense of self; 
we feel greed, aversion, and so forth; and many thoughts well up in 
our minds. We act and then experience the karmic: result of that act. 
That causes us to experience the afflictions. This then causes us to act 
again and accumulate more karma. In this way we are caught in the 
cycle of interdependence that keeps spinning around and around. We 
experience feeling, which leads to craving. Craving leads to grasping, 
which leads to becoming, then birth, and finally aging and death. In 
this way, we cycle through the twelve links of interdependence, pro­
ducing the appearances of this world. 
We need a way to put a stop to this; we need an antidote. What is 
the antidote? 
When that happens, it is important to possess the oral in­
structions on taking sickness as the path, taking joy and 
172 
TAKING THE SITUATIONS OF OUR LIVES AS THE PATH 
sorrow as the path, taking disturbing emotions as the path, 
and so forth. 
The remedies are: first, taking sickness as the path; second, tak­
ing joy and sorrow as the path; third, taking afflictions or disturb­
ing emotions as the path; and fourth, taking the bardo as the path, 
which is indicated by the phrase "and so forth" in the text. These 
four instructions are extremely important for us. When we get sick, 
for example, we do not want to just lie there enduring the pain and 
suffering of the illness. If we follow these instructions, when we get 
sick and maintain our practice, the illness will not be able to harm 
us, so the instructions on taking sickness as the path are important. 
Similarly, there are the instructions on taking joy and sorrow as the 
path. We sometimes feel joy or sorrow, which might lead us to expe­
rience one of the afflictions. But it is important that we do not lose 
control of ourselves to the afflictions. If we feel joy, we should not 
cling to the joy. If we feel pain, we should not react with aversion or 
be afraid of it. This is why we need the instructions on taking joy 
and sorrow as the path. When the disturbing emotions and other 
afflictions arise, we should not lose control of ourselves to them; we 
need to take them as the path. If we are overcome by the afflictions, 
we will accumulate karma, which will make us wander in samsara. 
This is why it is so important not to let ourselves be controlled by 
the afflictions. We need to use the experience and realization de­
veloped through our meditation to take all of these situations as 
the path. 
We need to take everything as the path, but what does this really 
mean? How can we take all these situations as the path? Khenpo 
Gangshar says: 
But, if you simply rest in naturalness, the essence of all these 
applications, it will suffice. 
Taking these situations as the path means to simply rest in the es­
sence, naturalness. If you are sick, if you feel joy or sorrow, or if you 
experience one of the afflictions, simply rest within the natural un­
altered essence of mind in the resting meditation of a kusulu. That 
173 
FOLLOWING THROUGH IN OUR LIVES 
is how we can take these situations as the path; that is all we need to 
do. This is the real essence of the instructions. 
Resting in the natural state does not mean that you cannqt think 
about things or work. The idea is to rest in the natural state and 
think at the same time. If you can do that, you can think things 
through and work, but there are no painful or sharp feelings. Some­
times strong afflictions such as anger and jealousy create obstacles for 
us, but when we take the afflictions as the path, they no longer have 
such power. We can rest in naturalness while continuing to work and 
fulfilling our responsibilities. There is a particular feeling that arises 
when we rest in naturalness; we must not forget that feeling and 
must always try to recall it. 
174 
14 
TAKING JOY 
AND SORROW AS 
THE PATH 
THE FIRST OF THE FOUR applications taught in these instructions 
is taking joy and sorrow as the path. We experience many differ­
ent joys and sorrows. When we do, we have a lot of thoughts. This 
produces a lot of afflictions, and many feelings arise. So we need to 
make sure that joy and sorrow do not harm us. If fact, we can even use 
them as a way to develop our experience, realization, and samadhi 
meditation. If we can take joy and sorrow as the path, this life will be 
peaceful and happy. 
Joy and sorrow are just thoughts-perhaps that makes them easi-
est to take as the path. Khenpo Gangshar says: 
If you feel happy when meeting with good conditions and 
sad when encountering negative circumstances and indulge 
in the feeling of happiness when happy and the feeling of 
sadness when sad, you will accumulate immense karma. 
Normally, when we encounter good conditions, everything is going 
well, and other people respect and praise us, we feel good and joyful. 
We are happy. Sometimes we encounter bad circumstances- nothing 
goes well, things seem hard, and all we hear are unkind and hurtful 
175 
FOLLOWING THROUGH IN OUR LIVES 
words-and we feel unhappy about it. We might feel pain and dis­
comfort. That is just how things are. 
But what happens when we feel happy or unhappy? If we indulge in 
our feelings, we will perform many karmic actions. When we are happy 
about a good situation, we feel attachment to it. But often we are not 
satisfied with the situation. It does not live up to what we wanted and 
so we indulge in the feelings of happiness. We want more and more, 
and then our attachment grows stronger and stronger; we cling harder 
and harder. 
When we indulge in our sadness, we think, "Oh, poor me!" It just 
gets worse and worse, and we get more and more depressed. Then 
we get upset and feel angry or jealous. Thus joy and excitement lead 
to more and more clinging; sorrow leads to anger and jealousy. As a 
result of either of these, we perform some sort of strong karmic act 
and accumulate more and more karma. 
So what should we do? All we really need to do is relax. But how 
do we do that? When we experience joy or sorrow, what do we need 
to do? 
Therefore, you must immediately recognize a thought, be it 
happy or sad, in any circumstances, positive or negative. 
Sometimes happy thoughts will arise in our minds, and sometimes 
unhappy thoughts arise. Whether the circumstances are positive or 
negative or the thoughts are happy or unhappy, we need to immedi­
ately recognize thoughts when they arise-"I just had a thought. I'm 
feeling happy. I'm feeling unhappy." In order to do that, we need to 
have mindfulness and awareness. When we get distracted, we don't 
recognize when thoughts of pleasure or displeasure arise. So we need 
to maintain our mindfulness. A thought arises, we recognize it, and 
we think, "That's a happy thought that I was following." Another 
thought arises and we think, "That's an unhappy thought that I was 
following." When we are feeling sad, we should not let ourselves be 
overcome by sadness. Instead, we should recognize and know that 
we are feeling sad. Similarly, if we are overcome by thoughts of joy, 
we get confused. That is not what we want. So when a thought of 
TAKING JOY AND SORROW AS THE PATH 
joy arises, we need to recognize it immediately and know what it is. 
First we have to know what is happening. 
But what do we do once we have recognized a thought? 
After recognition, you should rest in naturalness. Look into 
the one who feels happy or sad, without repressing one feel­
ing or encouraging the other. Your clear, empty, and naked 
mind-essence, free from any concern about joy or sorrow, 
freely becomes the innate state of awareness. 
Normally we think to ourselves that we need to cling to the things 
that we like. When we have unpleasant feelings toward something 
we want to push it away and reject it. We feel that we can't let our­
selves feel any suffering. But we should not do that. We should not 
repress some thoughts or encourage others. Instead, we should just 
rest naturally. There are many different ways, such as the techniques 
taught in the foundation vehicle or viewing them as emptiness in the 
mahayana, but in this tradition of resting in the nature of mind, the 
method is to not block or repress any feelings. When we are unhappy, 
we should not block it or look at it as some sort of a fault or problem. 
In this way, we do not repress anything, nor do we indulge in any­
thing, thinking it is good. Instead, we let the essence of what is feeling 
joy and what is feeling sorrow settle naturally into the nature of the 
mind. Look into the essence of the mind that feels that happiness. 
Look at the essence of the mind that feels unhappiness. There is no 
solid thing that is a feeling of happiness. There is no solid thing that 
is a feeling of unhappiness. Then just rest easily within that aware­
ness. Resting loose and relaxed within that awareness is what Khenpo 
Gangshar means by the phrase "resting in naturalness." 
In doing so, we take the experience we gain from the resting medi­
tation of the kusulu and use it here to take joy and sorrow as the path. 
When we do this, whatever happens, whether good or bad, joyful or 
sad, we will not think to ourselves, "This is extraordinarily great!" and 
feel attached to it, or "That's terrible," and get depressed and fearful. 
Instead of getting involved in it, we will look at its essence. The es­
sence of the mind is clear. The essence of that clarity is empty. The 
177 
FOLLOWING THROUGH IN OUR LIVES 
essence of emptiness is naked. Then you can rest within this, loose 
and relaxed. If you feel happy, you are not overcome by happiness. 
If you are unhappy, you are not overcome by fear or suffering. We 
do not need to exchange the feelings or alter them in any way. Sim­
ply rest, seeing them as they are. This is taking joy and sorrow as 
the path. 
15 
TAKING PAIN 
AND ILLNESS AS 
THE PATH 
I N ouR HUMAN LIVES, we get sick, and we need to be able to 
take that sickness as the path. When we are sick, we often feel un­
comfortable in our bodies and unhappy in our minds. Our body is 
just something made of flesh, bones, and blood. When conditions are 
adverse or there are no favorable circumstances, our bodies will fall 
ill. We might get extremely sick and feel intolerable pain. What can 
we do in this situation? We need to develop the ability to take this 
sickness as the path. 
Sickness and pain are feelings that take the form of suffering. When 
we do not have any instructions, sickness can be unbearable. We are 
overwhelmed by the sickness and oppressed by suffering. We need a 
method to make sure that the pain and illness cannot harm us, but 
that alone is not enough. We also need a way to make pain and illness 
a companion and helper in our practice. This is the practice of taking 
illness as the path. 
Khenpo Gangshar says: 
Furthermore, when your body falls sick, don't indulge in 
the illness, but rest in naturalness. Look into the painful 
sensation itsel£ The pain doesn't cease when resting like 
that. However, you will directly realize the innate state of 
179 
FOLLOWING THROUGH IN OUR LIVES 
awareness free from any thought about where it hurts, what 
hurts, how it hurts, as well as the subject and object of the 
pain. At that moment the sickness grows less intense and 
becomes somewhat insubstantial. 
When you get sick, you should not indulge in the illness. Do not focus 
on the pain, thinking, "I'm sick. I have a headache. My tooth hurts." 
That is indulging in the sickness. Pain and sickness just happen, and 
when they do, we cannot just stop the sensation. Instead, we can rest, 
relaxing our mind and letting it settle in naturalness in relation to 
the essence of that sensation itself without any feeling of displeasure 
or not wanting it, looking at the essence of the sensation itself. In 
the sutras, this is called the foundation of mindfulness of feeling. 
The pain does not necessarily stop, but when we look at the es­
sence of the pain, its essence is empty; the pain is just an appearance 
that arises through interdependence. There is no thought of what 
hurts, how it hurts, where it hurts, what causes the pain, or who feels 
the pain. Although the pain does not immediately disappear, it does 
not have such a strong grip on us as it did before-it diminishes a 
bit and feels less solid or real. Does the pain stop? It does not-pain 
and sickness do occur because of the illusory body of flesh and blood. 
But in the naked state of awareness, it does not really harm us. Pain 
and sickness might not disappear, but in comparison to times when 
we did not have any experience of looking at the nature of our mind, 
they are weaker and do not hurt us as much as they did before. This 
is what we call taking pain and illness as the path. 
When Khenpo Gangshar gave me these instructions, he went 
through each point in order. When he got to the instructions on tak­
ing sickness as the path, he pinched my cheek with his right hand. 
"Does that hurt?" he asked. "Don't have any thoughts about whether 
it is good or bad, just look at the essence of the pain." When I looked 
at the essence of the pain, it did not stop, but I did have the feeling it 
could not really do anything bad to me. It actually felt insubstantial, as 
it is described here, and I had the thought, "That's really how it is." 
For beginners, taking a serious illness or strong pain as the path is 
a bit difficult, but this is a way that you can practice taking illness or 
ISO 
TAKING PAIN AND ILLNESS AS THE PATH 
pain as the path yourself: pinch the skin on your arm hard. At first 
it really hurts, but look directly at the essence of the pain and rest in 
meditation. Look at its essence and ask yourself, where is the pain? 
What is it like? What is its nature? As you look at it, the pain does not 
disappear, but it does not hurt as much as it did before. You can then 
use this as an exercise and then try to practice it when you actually 
do fall ill or experience pain, first with minor complaints and then 
gradually with stronger pain. That is taking pain and illness as the 
path. When Khenpo Gangshar taught this to me, I was really glad to 
learn that there were methods like this. 
If you have a high level of realization, you can take sickness as the 
path; it will not really hurt you. For example, when the Sixteenth 
Karmapa fell ill with cancer, his doctor was a student of Trungpa 
Rinpoche named Mitchell Levy. When Dr. Levy was interviewed for 
the film The Lions Roar, he was asked what the Karmapa's illness was 
like. He replied that such cancer usually creates almost unbearable 
pain and suffering, but the Gyalwang Karmapa did not seem to have 
that experience. When asked how he was doing, the Karmapa replied 
that he was fine and doing well. The reason this happened was be­
cause the Karmapa took his illness as the path. The illusory body of 
flesh and blood itself was sick, but the illness was not accompanied 
by much pain and the Karmapa was not particularly harmed by his 
illness. This is the sort of experience that can happen if we practice 
these instructions. We need to take illness as the path, but some­
times people think that if you practice Dharma you do not need to 
get medical treatment. This is not what it means to take illness as the 
path. Everything is interdependent; you must get medical treatment. 
It is not mentioned here, but in Moonbeams of Mahamudra, in the 
context of taking situations as the path, Takpo Tashi Namgyal says 
not to do anything stupid: you must get medical treatment. 
When taking sickness as the path, we do not experience much 
suffering from the illness. We rest in samadhi without being over­
whelmed by the pain. It becomes a favorable condition for our medi­
tation. But this does not mean we should not get medical treatment. 
181 
16 
TAKING AFFLICTIONS 
AND EMOTIONS 
AS THE PATH 
WE ALSO NEED TO TAKE the afflictions as the path. This is very 
important because if we are unable to take them as the path, no 
matter how good our practice may be, we will be overcome by the af-
flictions. The afflictions are going to arise. They come out of the power 
of our imprints from the past. The main afflictions are greed, aversion, 
delusion, pride, and jealousy, which the Buddha described as the five 
poisons. When they occur, they create pain in our minds and suffer­
ing in our bodies. They lead us to do things that harm ourselves and 
others, which will bring us bad results. We lose control over ourselves 
to the afflictions, which necessarily creates many difficulties and suf­
fering for ourselves and others. This is why these are called afflictions, 
and why they are said to have an aspect of suffering. 
The Tibetan word nyiinmong and the Sanskrit word klesha are often 
translated into English as "disturbing emotions" or "negative emo­
tions." But when we translate it this way, sometimes people have too 
broad a conception of what they are-they think all emotions are 
afflictions. The Tibetan nyiinmong does not include feelings such as 
love, compassion, devotion, regret, guilt, or sadness. These are strong 
feelings that are called emotions in English but are not nyonmong 
or afflictions. The afflictions include those things that naturally 
182 
TAKING AFFLICTIONS AND EMOTIONS AS THE PATH 
bring harm to ourselves and others, such as greed, aversion, delusion, 
pride, and envy, which are mentioned here. I think it is important to 
make this distinction. 
Because we are ordinary individuals, the afflictions will naturally 
occur from time to time. No one can give us a medicine to stop them, 
nor can anyone else prevent them from happening. Actually, the af.. 
flictions themselves will naturally disappear when we practice. The 
reason is that they are just a type of thought. Like anything else in 
the mind, they appear to us, but if you look at their nature, you will 
not find anything solid about them, no matter how strong they may 
seem. In essence, they are just a thought in the mind. 
Although the afflictions are just thoughts, if we lose control of our­
selves to them, we will commit bad actions. As Shantideva says in The 
Way of the Bodhisattva: 
If all the gods and demigods besides 
Together came against me as my foes, 
They would be powerless to throw me down 
To fires of hell of Unrelenting Pain. 
And yet the mighty fiend of my afflictions 
Flings me in an instant headlong down 
To where the mighty lord of mountains 
Would be burned, its very ashes all consumed. 
At some point, someone will do something bad to us, causing us 
some sort of pain or suffering. But can that person, that enemy, cast 
us down into the deepest of the hells, the Hell of Unrelenting Pain, 
and make us experience the horrendous suffering there? They can­
not. But when our enemies the afflictions harm us, they can throw 
us right down into the Hell of Unrelenting Pain. This is how power­
ful they are. 
Yet the essence of the afflictions is naturally empty. As it says in The 
Way of the Bodhisattva: 
Miserable defilements, scattered by the eye of wisdom! 
When we look at them carefully, with intelligence, they do not have 
any essence. When a strong affliction such as anger arises, we have 
FOLLOWING THROUGH IN OUR LIVES 
the unbearable feeling that we need to hurt someone or say some­
thing mean, but where is the affliction? What is its essence? When we 
examine it and meditate, we see that its essence is naturally empty. 
If we realize this, it naturally has no power and disappears. This is 
why many instruction manuals say that when the afflictions arise, 
we should not block them or reject them. Do not follow them either, 
but instead look at their essence. If we do that, when greed, anger, or 
delusion arise, they will naturally dissipate and become nothing. This 
is how you should take them as the path. 
IDENTIFYING THE AFFLICTIONS 
AND THEIR RESULTS 
Khenpo Gangshar writes: 
A person who has one disturbing emotion will also pos­
sess the others. But due to the differences in people, some 
will have more anger, some more stinginess, some more 
dullness, some more desire, some more envy, and some will 
have a greater portion of pride. That is why there are differ­
ent types of buddha families. 
A person who has any one of the afflictions or disturbing emotions 
will also have all of the others-someone who has greed will also 
have anger and all the other afflictions. They may or may not be 
manifest, but they are present until such time as they have been com­
pletely abandoned. But because people are all different, some have 
more anger. Some are stingier. Some are more deluded, some greed­
ier, more envious, or more prideful. These differences come about be­
cause of the imprints to which we have been habituated throughout 
beginningless time. 
There are different types of people, and because of this, there are 
also different buddha families. Those who have more anger are in 
the family of the Buddha's body of Akshobhya. Pride and stinginess 
both correspond to the family of the Buddha's qualities, the family 
of Ratnasambhava. Those who are most afflicted by desire belong 
to the family of speech. The envious belong to the family of activity, 
TAKING AFFLICTIONS AND EMOTIONS AS THE PATH 
and the deluded belong to the family of the Buddha's mind. These 
are the families that are pointed out to us during vajrayana empow­
erments when we cast a stick into the mandala to see what family it 
points to. 
But what are the afflictions? We need to be able to identify each of 
the different afflictions-anger, stinginess, delusion, desire, envy, and 
pride-and learn to recognize them. Khenpo Gangshar describes the 
characteristics of each of them in order. 
The first is anger: 
The disturbing emotion of anger is an agitated state of 
mind caused by a painful sensation based on an unpleasant 
object. 
Anger arises when we encounter an object that is unpleasant. We see 
something unpleasant that does not fit with our wishes. We do not like 
it and get annoyed. Perhaps someone said something nasty, someone 
hurt us, or we are experiencing some sort of difficulty or unpleasant 
situation. The object that provokes our displeasure might be another 
sentient being, or it might be an inanimate object like a rock. Some­
times we encounter unpleasant people and sometimes we encounter 
unpleasant things. As a result of either of these circumstances, we 
experience displeasure in our mind. That stirs up our mind, and then 
we start to struggle and fight. This happens most often with regard to 
other sentient beings, although we do sometimes struggle and fight 
against material objects as well. That is aversion, or anger. 
Sometimes we encounter sentient beings or material objects that 
are very pleasant, and we feel stingy. 
Stinginess is the inability to give away to others some 
attractive object because of retaining a tight clinging to 
owning it. 
When we have something, we think it is our own. We cling to it 
tightly and feel like we could not possibly give it away or lend it to 
anyone. If we were to see other people using or enjoying that object, 
we would feel upset. That is stinginess. 
The third affliction is delusion, or dullness: 
185 
FOLLOWING THROUGH IN OUR LIVES 
Dullness is like darkness and is the root of all evil. It is the 
lack of recognizing one's essence and it obscures the nature 
ofthings. 
Delusion is simply not knowing or not understanding. When Khenpo 
Gangshar says that "it is the lack of recognizing one's essence," this 
means that we don't clearly see what it is. Because we do not recog­
nize the nature of our minds, we do not really understand how things 
are; it prevents us from seeing the nature of things. Through not 
knowing this nature, our delusion gets stronger and then we become 
more envious, angry, or greedy. The afflictions gradually develop and 
then all kinds of faults and problems can arise. In and of itself, this 
dullness is not particularly strong and is not such a great fault, but 
because it causes all the other afflictions to develop, it is the root of 
all our faults, problems, and difficulties. 
When we talk about other afflictions such as hatred, greed, jeal­
ousy, stinginess, and so forth, they are easy to identify. But delusion is 
naturally unclear and foggy. Since its nature is simply not knowing, 
it is hard to say, "This is delusion." This makes it difficult to recognize. 
It is darkness or blankness: our failure to see the nature of our minds 
obscures the nature of things so that we do not know it either. It is 
the root of all faults. 
Delusion is just ignorance and dullness. With anger you can say, 
"I got angry" or "Now my anger has gone away." But we never think, 
"My ignorance has gone away." We are always deluded and ignorant. 
Delusion is continually present until we abandon it through medita­
tion. As we study and practice and the essence of delusion gets clearer 
and clearer, the fogginess of delusion gradually lessens. 
The fourth affliction is desire, or greed: 
Desire is to accept, long for, and feel attached to pleasant 
things like sights or sounds and so forth. In particular, car­
nal lust for the union of male and female is the primary 
attachment. 
The objects we perceive- forms we see with our eyes, sounds we hear 
with our ears, scents we smell with our nose, tastes we taste with 
!86 
TAKING AFFLICTIONS AND EMOTIONS AS THE PATH 
our tongue, and the sensations that we feel with our body-can be 
either pleasant or unpleasant. When they are pleasant, we want to 
cling to them and get more of them. We think, "I want that! That's 
really great." We want them and feel attached to them. That is what 
we mean by greed or desire in general, but among all the types of 
desire, the root is sexual desire. Thus desire means wanting and being 
attached to pleasurable things. 
The fifth affliction is envy: 
Envy is to reject and therefore disapprove of the virtues of 
someone who is higher than or equal to onesel£ 
Sometimes we see people who are superior or equal to ourselves and 
feel envious of them. We generally feel envious 9f those better than us 
or our equals; we do not feel envious of our inferiors. Perhaps some­
one has more qualities or education, and we do not like it; we cannot 
accept it. Sometimes we see someone who is on the same level as us, 
but we begin to suspect that they might end up better off than we 
are and cannot accept that, either. We see their qualities but cannot 
accept that they are qualities-we view them as faults. This is what 
we mean by envy. 
The sixth of the afflictions is pride: 
Pride is to regard others as lower and to feel superior in 
either religious or mundane matters. 
Pride primarily occurs when we regard other people to be lower 
than ourselves. There are two sorts of things we can feel pride about: 
religious matters and worldly matters. You might think you are a 
better Dharma practitioner than someone else or that you know 
more about the Dharma. Or you might consider yourself superior 
in terms of your work or some other worldly quality. In either case, 
thinking "I'm better than them" or "I'm the best" is what we mean 
by pride. 
Most of the time, pride arises when we look at those we view as 
inferior. But if we look at it in more detail, there are seven types of 
pride: When we look at inferiors and perceive them as lower than 
us, that is called either just "pride" or "lesser pride." Sometimes we 
FOLLOWING THROUGH IN OUR LIVES 
look at our equals and we think we are better than they are. That is 
called "superior pride." Sometimes we see someone who is our su­
perior and we think, "I am that person's equal" or "I am better than 
that person." This is called "more proud than pride." When we see 
our body and minds and feel conceited, thinking "That is me," this 
is "pride in thinking me." When we think we have clairvoyance and 
other powers although we actually do not, this is the "pride of exag­
geration." Sometimes we look at people who are superior to ourselves 
and think we are almost as good as they are. This is "pride in think­
ing almost." Sometimes we look at ourselves and perceive our own 
thoughts as qualities rather than faults. We think they are great. This 
is what we call "mistaken pride." 
It is important for us to deal with our afflictions and not fall under 
their control, since these six different afflictions are each a cause for 
rebirth in one of the six realms of samsara. Khenpo Gangshar uses the 
first one, anger, as an example: 
These six disturbing emotions create the causes for the exis­
tence of th~ six classes of beings, such as rebirth in the hells 
through predominant anger. 
When our predominant affliction is anger-when we have strong 
anger-this leads to rebirth in the hell realms. Similarly, strong stin­
giness leads to rebirth as a hungry ghost. Strong delusion or dullness 
leads to rebirth in the animal realm, strong desire to rebirth in the 
human realm, strong jealousy to rebirth as a demigod, and strong 
pride leads to rebirth in the realms of the gods of the desire realm . 
. We will be reborn in the realm of samsara that corresponds to our 
strongest affliction. 
NATURALLY LIBERATING THE 
AFFLICTIONS 
What should we do when afflictions arise? How do we keep from fall­
ing under their control? The way to practice is to build upon the ex­
perience we have in the resting meditation of the kusulu: we can take 
them as the path within this meditation. As the instructions say: 
!88 
TAKING AFFLICTIONS AND EMOTIONS AS THE PATH 
Whenever one of them arises you must recognize it imme­
diately. When recognizing it, don't reject it, don't accept it, 
just rest in naturalness [looking] into that particular dis­
turbing emotion. At that same moment it is self-liberated 
and is called mirror-like wisdom, etc. 
We are just ordinary beings, so the afflictions do arise in us. Normally 
we do not recognize when or how the afflictions arise and so we lose 
control of ourselves to them. What we need to do instead is recognize 
them immediately when they occur. If it was anger, we need to be 
able to say, "This is anger." If we do not sense that we have become 
angry, we will be overcome by the anger; we will feel badly, get into 
fights, or say something hurtful. This happens because we did not 
recognize the anger. So we need to recognize the anger immediately 
when it arises. It is the same with stinginess, desire, pride, or jealousy: 
we need to recognize them as soon as they occur. Sometimes they 
well up naturally and it is difficult to see them, but we need to rec­
ognize them. 
Once we have recognized an affliction, what do we need to do? 
We do not need to tell ourselves how bad it is and try to stop it. We 
should' not think, "I should not let myself get angry. I should not 
let myself feel envious. I should not feel that." We do not need to 
do anything to repress it. At the same time, we should not be like 
ordinary people and take the affliction up, follow it, and indulge in 
it. We should not think it is good and that we need to accomplish 
something with it. If we do not recognize the affliction when it oc­
curs and end up following it, it will get stronger and stronger and 
then lead to even more afflictions. If we get angry and then we fol­
low the anger, we will act it out with our body and speech. If we 
follow pride or jealousy, they will just get stronger and stronger. That 
is why we do not follow our afflictions. We need to avoid both of 
these approaches. 
So what should we do? Whenever an affliction occurs, we should 
just look at it and rest in naturalness. When the affliction of anger 
occurs, we should look at its essence and ask, "Where did the anger 
arise?" Anger seems like something strong from the outside, but if 
FOLLOWING THROUGH IN OUR LIVES 
we actually look at its nature, where did it come from? What is its 
essence? When we investigate this, we see that its essence is empty. If 
we then rest in the expanse of the affiiction itself, it naturally disap­
pears. Whether it is anger, desire, or delusion, when we rest in the 
expanse of the natural state, it is liberated the moment it appears. 
Many great masters in the past have explained this with the example 
of tying a snake in a knot. When you tie a snake in a knot, the snake 
will gradually loosen the knot and untie itsel£ It is the same here: the 
affiictions are self-liberated and naturally disappear when we look at 
them and see their essence. 
If we do not look at the essence of the affiictions, they will grow 
stronger and stronger, and we will end up committing many harm­
ful acts. So we need to apply a remedy for the affiictions. The rem­
edy is not to reject, block, or suppress the emotion-as scientists 
these days say, repressing your disturbing emotions will lead to ill­
ness in your body. We Buddhists also say that you should not block 
your emotions. This, however, does not mean that we should just 
follow our affiictions and go wherever they lead us. Instead, we 
need to look at the essence of the affiictions, and then they will be 
self-liberated. This means that they will just naturally be pacified, 
and become the root that will be transformed into wisdom in the 
future, such as with the transformation of aversion into mirror­
like wisdom. 
These instructions are also given in a song by Ratna Lingpa, who 
was one of the great tertons, or treasure discoverers, who have re­
vealed many of Guru Rinpoche's teachings. There have been many 
tertons over the centuries, but the main ones are the twenty-five 
Lingpas, of whom five are considered to be like kings. These five are 
Sangye Lingpa, who lived in the central region; Dorje Lingpa, in 
the east; Ratna Lingpa, in the south; Perna Lingpa, in the west; and 
Karma Lingpa, in the north. They found many profound and helpful 
Dharma teachings. For example, The Tibetan Book of the Dead is a trea­
sure of Karma Lingpa that advises us on how to protect ourselves in 
the bardo after death, instructing us on the practices of the peaceful 
and wrathful deities. Ratna Lingpa, whom Khenpo Gangshar quotes, 
was one of these five king-like Lingpas. 
TAKING AFFLICTIONS AND EMOTIONS AS THE PATH 
Ratna Lingpa gave many of his teachings in the form of songs, and 
these songs were compiled in three different treasuries. This song is 
taken from his Second Treasury. It teaches how to take anger, delusion, 
pride, and desire as the path, and it gives essentially the same instruc­
tion as Khenpo Gangshar gave above. The first verse teaches how to 
deal with anger: 
The essence of your angry mind is clear awareness, 
Bright and empty the moment you recognize it. 
This nature is called mirror-like wisdom. 
Young maid, let's rest in the natural state. 
Anger does sometimes arise, and when it does, it is very clear-our 
awareness is sharp and clear at that time. If our attention is directed 
outside ourselves at the object we are angry at, we will not recognize 
the essence of our anger. Because we do not know its essence, it grows 
stronger and stronger. We are afflicted by one disturbing emotion, 
and that leads to more afflictions, which cause us to perform harm­
ful acts and accumulate bad karma. For that reason, we should not 
follow our anger. Instead, we need to turn our attention inward and 
look at the essence of the anger. When we recognize that we have got­
ten angry, we need to look at the essence of anger: where is the anger? 
When we look at its nature, we cannot find it; it cannot be estab­
lished as anything. We see that it does not truly exist. It is empty. But 
at the same time it does not stop: it is clear-bright and empty the 
moment we recognize it. This is the same as in Khenpo Gangshar's 
instructions. 
The anger does not become bright and empty the moment we rec­
ognize it. When Ratna Lingpa says "the moment you recognize it," 
that means that it has been like that all the time, but it is only now 
that we see it. When you get angry, look at the essence of the anger it­
self, and see that there is nothing to the essence of the anger and that 
it is the union of clarity and emptiness. The anger becomes natural, 
and among the five wisdoms it becomes mirror-like wisdom. In the 
last line, "Young maid, let's rest in the natural state," Ratna Lingpa 
addresses his wife, to whom he says that he practices within this state. 
This teaches how to take anger as the path. 
I91 
FOLLOWING THROUGH IN OUR LIVES 
The second of the afflictions that he discusses is delusion. 
The essence of your dull mind is clear self-awareness, 
Wide open the moment you look into your natural face. 
This vital nature is called dharmadhatu wisdom. 
Young maid, let's rest in the natural state. 
As we discussed above, delusion is foggy by nature. Delusion might 
be foggy and dull, but the nature of mind itself is always clear. It is al­
ways knowing; it can always understand something. When we experi­
ence delusion, we do not really see this, but actually the clarity of the 
mind never ceases. The mind is always clear and knowing; it never 
turns into something like a rock. The clear self-awareness is continu­
ally present and knowing. If we look into our natural face-if we 
look at the essence of the delusion itself-it is wide awake, which 
means that it is clear. It's like there is a little gap. This nature is called 
the dharmadhatu wisdom. When you look at the essence you see that 
it is clear and knowing, but also that it is empty. 
Whenever any of the afflictions occurs, if you recognize it and look 
at its nature, you see that it does not have any real essence. It no 
longer takes the form of an affliction that is directed outward: it is 
looking inward at the essence of the dharma nature. For this reason, 
when we look at the essence of the affliction of delusion, it becomes 
dharmadhatu wisdom. The dharmadhatu is the aspect of emptiness. 
When you look at the essence of delusion, it naturally disappears into 
emptiness and becomes the essence of dharmadhatu wisdom. When 
he says, "Young maid, let's rest in the natural state," he means that this 
is how he takes delusion as the path, and that all his students should 
do this as well. 
The third stanza discusses pride: 
The essence of your proud mind is the unfolding of self­
awareness, 
Naturally empty the moment you rest, looking into your 
natural face. 
This state is called the wisdom of equality. 
Young maid, let's rest in the natural state. 
192 
TAKING AFFLICTIONS AND EMOTIONS AS THE PATH 
Sometimes we think we are great-we think, "I'm something spe­
cial!" However, when you look at the essence of pride, you cannot 
establish it as anything at all. It becomes nothing and empty of itsel£ 
Looking at this essence is called the wisdom of equality. When we 
think, "I'm great! I'm better than other people," we do not see the 
fundamental equality of ourselves and all other sentient beings. But 
when we look at the essence of pride to see where it is and what it 
is like, it naturally dissolves. When our pride has been quelled, we 
understand that all beings are essentially equal in the natural state. 
This isn't a conceptual thought that everyone is like ourselves; when 
pride is stilled, it naturally subsides into the essence of the wisdom 
of equality. 
The last verse discusses the affliction of desire: 
The essence of your lustful mind is attachment for sure, 
The state of empty bliss, the moment you sustain it 
without clinging. 
This nature is called discriminating wisdom. 
Young maid, let's rest in the natural state. 
Whether you call it lust, desire, or greed, the desirous mind is basi­
cally craving-really wanting something and being attached to it. 
But when you do not follow it and are not attached to it, when you 
look into its essence, it is comfortable and blissful, and its essence is 
naturally empty. This is called discriminating wisdom. This means 
that you can look at everything and see it clearly; you know what 
everything is. 
These four stanzas cover four of the afflictions, but there are still 
two that Khenpo Gangshar taught above but are not mentioned here: 
stinginess and jealousy. These two, however, can be considered to be 
subsumed under the four taught here: stinginess is included within 
desire, and envy is included within anger. Other afflictions, such as 
bearing grudges, spite, or hypocrisy, can also be considered part of 
these four. In this way, Ratna Lingpa's song tells us how to take all 
of the various afflictions as the path. 
We must remember that we are all ordinary individuals, and as 
ordinary individuals we will sometimes experience the afflictions. 
193 
FOLLOWING THROUGH IN OUR LIVES 
They are going to arise. But when they do arise, it is not necessarily 
bad. The afflictions naturally arise because of our imprints from be­
ginningless time in samsara. If they aren't bad, does that mean that 
we should just follow them? It does not mean that. If we follow them, 
it will create a lot of problems. What we really need to do is know the 
essence of the affliction. We need to look at the essence of the afflic­
tion, and if we do this, we will see that it cannot be established as any­
thing in itself. This is a characteristic of the afflictions. Even though 
afflictions do not truly exist, they occur. When the afflictions arise, 
they seem extremely strong and solid. That is how they appear, but 
that does not mean that we need to either repress them or indulge in 
them. We just need to know them as they are. They are like bubbles in 
water-the center of a bubble is empty, so it will naturally disappear. 
When you look at the afflictions and see that their nature is naturally 
empty, they just disappear on their own. 
METHODS FOR DEALING WITH 
THE AFFLICTIONS 
Following this is a discussion of the different ways we can deal with 
the afflictions. In general, there are three different ways we can use 
the afflictions: to reject and block them, to view them as empty, or to 
follow them: 
But if you regard disturbing emotions as faults and reject 
them, they may be temporarily suppressed but not cut 
from their root. Consequently, at some point, the poison­
ous remnant will reemerge, as is the case of the mundane 
dhyana states. 
When any of the afflictions occur, from one perspective it is good 
to realize that that they are problems, but that does not mean that 
they should be blocked or repressed. If we just think that the afflic­
tions are no good and that we must not let them arise, we might 
succeed in suppressing them and stop them for some period of time, 
but we will not be able to uproot them entirely. Since they have not 
been eradicated, for a while it may seem as if there are no afflictions, 
194 
TAKING AFFLICTIONS AND EMOTIONS AS THE PATH 
but they will inevitably resurface. This is like the mundane dhyana 
meditations that some non-Buddhists practice, particularly in India. 
These are very deep states of samadhi during which the afflictions 
are suppressed and do not manifest for some period of time. But the 
afflictions have not been uprooted entirely. Eventually the medita­
tion will wear off, the latent afflictions will reappear, and the practi­
tioner will continue to wander in samsara. This is not what we need 
to do. 
Another approach would be to just see all the disturbing emotions 
as emptiness: 
On the one hand, when you regard disturbing emotions as 
emptiness, your practice turns into "taking emptiness as the 
path" and not the disturbing emotions. Thus your practice 
doesn't become the short path, the special quality of mantra. 
There are two different paths we can follow: taking emptiness as the 
path and taking the afflictions as the path. When we think that the 
afflictions are emptiness and meditate on that, this is not taking 
the afflictions as the path, it is taking emptiness as the path. We do 
not normally think that things are empty, but if we consider that 
they are empty and meditate on that, we can gradually progress down 
the path. This is not the short path; it is a long and difficult path. It 
requires developing certainty that phenomena are empty, meditating 
on emptiness, and then gradually gaining an experience of empti­
ness, so it does not have the special quality of the vajrayana. Can we 
give up the afflictions through this path? We can, but it is not a path 
whereby we can give them up quickly. 
The next thing we could do is indulge in the afflictions by follow-
ing them. 
On the other hand, if you indulge in the disturbing emo­
tions, thi~king they are something concrete, it is like eating 
a poisonous plant and is the cause that binds you to sam­
sara, just like the copulation of ordinary people. 
If we don't take control over the afflictions and instead fall under their 
control, it is like eating poison. For instance, if you eat a poisonous 
195 
FOLLOWING THROUGH IN OUR LIVES 
plant you will get sick, die, or experience all sorts of different suf­
ferings. Likewise, if we think that the afflictions are real and true, so 
we should follow them, this binds us to samsara. It is not the cause of 
freedom from samsara; it just increases and intensifies the afflictions. 
"The copulation of ordinary people" should be understood as acting 
out of the power oflust. This is why acting upon the afflictions is not 
appropriate. 
These three ways of dealing with the afflictions-suppressing 
them, viewing them as emptiness, and indulging them-will not 
work. What we need to do instead is take them as the path. But how 
can we put that into practice? Here Khenpo Gangshar gives us an 
analogy: 
For these reasons, just as poison can be extracted from a poi­
sonous plant and taken as a medicine, the special quality of 
this teaching lies in the fact that any disturbing emotion 
that may arise is wisdom the moment you relax in natural­
ness. Look directly into it, don't deliberately reject it, regard 
it as a fault, indulge in it concretely, or regard it as a virtue. 
There are many plants that will harm you if you eat them as they are, 
but if you extract the poison from the plant, the poison itself can be 
transformed into medicine. This is a common way to make medi­
cines. We need the poison, but we can't take it directly-we have to 
convert it into medicine. We need to work with our afflictions in the 
same way: when an affliction arises, should we think that it is bad 
and needs to be blocked? We must not block or repress it at all. Nor 
should we, thinking that they are good and wonderful qualities, fol­
low our afflictions. For example, if you get angry, do not think, "I'm a 
great hero. I can go out and fight!" Do not fall into either extreme: do 
nofsee the affliction as a quality and take it up; do not see it as a fault 
and try to repress it. Afflictions are going to arise, and when they do, 
we need to identify them immediately. We need to look directly into 
the essence of the affliction the moment it arises and relax into natu­
ralness within the recognition of the nature of the affliction. When 
you see the essence of the affliction, it becomes the union of clarity 
and emptiness, and at that point it is transformed into wisdom. The 
TAKING AFFLICTIONS AND EMOTIONS AS THE PATH 
affliction is immediately quelled and becomes mirror-like wisdom, 
the wisdom of equality, discriminating wisdom, or dharmadhatu 
wisdom, as described above. This is the special quality of this teach­
ing. Whichever affliction occurs, if you want to take it as the path, just 
look directly at its nature and it will naturally be pacified. 
Khenpo Gangshar also briefly discusses other instructions on tak-
ing afflictions as the path: 
Beyond this, if you are interested in the system of direct 
instructions, such as the teachings on the path of means, 
you must learn them in detail from the oral instructions of 
your master. 
There are many practices of the path of means, such as the creation 
stage, tummo, the illusory body, and many others, but these need di­
rect instructions which tell you specifically what to do and how­
how to visualize, etc. If you want to practice, you need to request 
and receive the instructions from a lama and then practice them. But 
what Khenpo Gangshar is teaching here is a general method for deal­
ing with the afflictions. 
APPLYING THIS METHOD TO 
OTHER EMOTIONS 
These instructions on taking the afflictions as the path teach us how 
to deal with the six afflictions of anger, stinginess, delusion, desire, 
jealousy, and pride, but there are also other emotions we can feel. 
Sometimes we get depressed or discouraged. Sometimes we feel re­
gret and guilt, and sometimes we are afraid, or even terrified. The 
Buddha taught that these are not afflictions-they are emotions and 
they may be disturbing, but they are not afflictions. These emotions 
arise and they can create discomfort or difficulty, but they do not 
generally directly lead us to harm other people. They are not causes 
for future pain and unhappiness. For example, when we feel regret 
and guilt, we feel unhappy, but it does not generally motivate us to 
do something hurtful. That is why such emotions are not included 
among the afflictions. However, they are unpleasant and even painful 
197 
FOLLOWING THROUGH IN OUR LIVES 
experiences, so we need a way to help ourselves when they arise. The 
way to deal with any depression, anxiety, or fear is to look at the na­
ture of the emotion and rest in the natural state. When you look at 
the essence of fear, the fear disappears without harming you. When 
you feel depressed, look at the essence of the depression, and it will 
dissipate. You can do the same thing with regret and guilt: when you 
look at the essence of guilt and see that its essence cannot be estab­
lished as anything, there is no way it can hurt you. We can use the 
same instructions for taking the afflictions as the path with the emo­
tions of fear, regret, guilt, and depression as well. 
17 
TAKING THE BARDO 
AS THE PATH 
D EATH IS SOMETHING THAT is going tO happen tO all of US. 
We will die and experience the bardo state. There is no way to 
avoid it. Since it is one hundred percent certain that we will experi­
ence this, we need instructions that can help. There are many instruc­
tions in Buddhism on what we should do in the bardo, especially in 
the secret mantra vajrayana, but among all of them, Khenpo Gang­
shar's are among the simplest and easiest. Yet they are also extremely 
beneficial and powerful. 
What is death? During this life we have both a body and a mind, 
and these two are connected. Our body is a composite, a material 
aggregate of all our flesh, blood, and bones, but our mind is clear 
awareness. During this life, they coexist: the mind thinks of the body 
as its own. It resides within the body, supported by the body. But 
at some point, the body and mind will separate. It is like a person 
inside a house: while inside, the person is supported by the house, 
but eventually one goes outside. Similarly, our internal mind re­
sides within the external body, but the mind must leave the body at 
some point. That point when the mind and body separate is what 
we call death. 
When the body and the mind separate, they part from each other, 
but that does not mean that the mind stops. The clear part of the 
mind is unceasing and continues as it had been before. The clarity 
199 
FOLLOWING THROUGH IN OUR LIVES 
continues at the time of death without changing. The consciousness 
in the bardo is not born anew; .it is a continuation of the stream of 
consciousness from the previous life. 
During this life there are the appearances of this life, but when we 
die, these appearances will dissolve and the appearances of our next 
rebirth will eventually begin. The period between these two is what 
we call the bardo or in-between state. For example, when you flip 
from one television channel to another, it seems as if you go straight 
from one channel to the next, but what really happens is that when 
you are watching channel one, decide you do not like it, and flip 
the channel, the picture on the screen collapses into itself and ceases 
momentarily before the image on the next channel appears. When 
you decide you do not like that channel either and change the chan­
nel again, that picture collapses and then another appears. Every 
time you change the channel, the old image collapses before the new 
one appears. In between channels is a short, empty pause. That is 
what we would call the bardo if we were talking about the appear­
ances of our lives. 
TV channels are not important, but the bardo is. The point when 
the appearances of this life stop and we exchange them for the ap­
pearance of a new life is critical. The reason is because if we are not 
overcome by fear or the afflictions and can maintain a good, calm, 
and gende state of mind, it will help us to make the appearances of 
the next life positive. If instead we are overpowered by fear and afflic­
tions during the bardo and our mind is agitated by difficult feelings 
and afflictions such as anger, our next life will be tumultuous-we 
will not be able to take a good rebirth. In order to prevent that, we 
must be able to control ourselves during the bardo. The way to make 
sure that we will be able to do that is to think about the bardo before­
hand. If we contemplate and prepare for it now, our minds will be 
loose and relaxed when we arrive at the time of death and during the 
bardo as well. We should not think that there is no need to worry and 
put it aside. If you do that, when you suddenly find yourself in the 
bardo, you will feel afraid, depressed, or even angry, which will lead 
to many difficulties. That is why it is important to practice taking the 
bardo as the path now. 
2.00 
TAKING THE BARDO AS THE PATH 
The reason we experienced the confused perceptions of this life 
is that the life wind is currently within the central channel. When 
the life wind loses its strength, the white drop we received from our 
father and the red drop we received from our mother will come 
together and meet in our heart. Once they meet, the appearances 
of the bardo will occur. At the time of death, all the imprints of 
confused appearance collapse into the nature of the mind and the 
dharma nature. If someone has a good, strong meditation practice, 
this moment is very beneficial because the path luminosity one 
learns to recognize in meditation practice and the ground lumi­
nosity of the dharma nature come together like the reunion of a 
mother and child. If we can rest in samadhi within this union, it 
will be very beneficial. But if we do not have such a strong medita­
tion practice, we will not recognize the ground luminosity, and it 
will be as if we just fell unconscious. We will not have the feeling 
that appearances of the dharma nature and the nature of mind are 
occurring. When we arise from that, the body and mind will have 
separated. 
The mind is made up of eight different consciousnesses. In each 
of these consciousnesses, there are fifty-one different mental factors 
that can occur, which are like the coarse thoughts that we have. The 
bare consciousnesses themselves normally reside within our heart. 
When the mind and body separate at death, the eight conscious­
nesses are released from the body and appear as the forty-two peace­
ful deities including the eight great male bodhisattvas, the eight great 
female bodhisattvas, and others. The motion of the coarse thoughts­
the fifty-one mental factors-normally occurs within the brain, but 
when released from the body at death, the fifty-one factors appear as 
the fifty-one bloodthirsty, wrathful deities. If we have done creation­
stage visualization practices, we can recognize these deities, which 
will allow us to take a good rebirth. However, if our practice is not 
stable, we will not recognize the deities, and we will be overcome 
by the afflictions of desire and aversion, or by sheer terror. Then all 
the confused perceptions of the bardo will occur. This is why it is so 
important to do practices to prepare for the bardo, as described in 
various instruction manuals and teachings. 
201 
FOLLOWING THROUGH IN OUR LIVES 
fAMILIARIZING YOURSELF WITH NATURAL 
LUMINOSITY AND RESONANCE 
Khenpo Gangshar's instructions for taking the bardo as the path are 
simple, uncomplicated instructions that we can easily follow. To prac­
tice them, cover your eyes lightly or block your ears. There will be 
lights and sounds that naturally manifest. When you perceive these, 
rest naturally for a while. Khenpo Gangshar says: 
When you press your fingers on your ears or on your eyes, 
sounds naturally resound and colors and lights naturally 
manifest. Rest naturally for a long time and grow accus­
tomed to the appearance of utterly empty forms that don't 
exist anywhere-neither outside, inside, nor in between. 
Since, at the time of death, there is nothing other than this, 
you will recognize these sounds, colors, and lights as your 
self-display and be liberated, just like meeting a person you 
already know or a child leaping onto its mother's lap. 
His instructions are to close your eyes firmly so that external forms 
no longer appear. At first you only see blackness, but if you let your 
mind rest loose and relaxed within that blackness, gradually various 
lights will appear. There will be red, yellow, green, or blue lights­
lights of many colors and shapes. As you keep looking, the lights will 
grow stronger and brighter. They are not necessarily any particular 
color or any particular shape. These appearances are what in the bardo · 
we call the natural radiance of the dharma nature. When the eye fac­
ulty has stopped at death, the natural radiance of the dharma nature 
will occur, and if we have no experience of this, then we will wonder 
what these lights are. We will be terrified of these confused appear­
ances. This is why we practice now: we look at the shapes and colors 
that appear when we close our eyes tightly. These lights appear, but 
there is nothing about them that can be established as real. Just rest 
loosely and naturally, looking at this without thinking of anything. 
When you do this, the empty lights of the dharma nature do not dis­
appear, but your fear of them will diminish. This is how we take the 
natural radiance of the empty dharma nature as the path. 
202 
TAKING THE BARDO AS THE PATH 
We can do something similar with our hearing. When resting in 
natural samadhi, clench your jaws together tightly and listen to what 
you hear. At first there isn't any sound, but then we begin to hear a 
slight roar in the background. As we rest loose and relaxed, the roar­
ing will grow louder and louder until it is loud and dear. This sound 
is the natural sound of the empty dharma nature. This is not like 
the sound of playing gongs or drums- it is not any kind of external 
sound from some object. This sound has no real source or place that 
it comes &om; it is the natural resonance of the dharma nature. As 
we listen to it, it grows stronger and stronger until it sounds like a 
thousand simultaneous thunderclaps. 
This sound will also occur when we are in the bardo, and it is quite 
possible that we will be terrified of it when we hear it then. So we 
need listen to it now, so that it will not be so frightening when we hear 
it in the bardo. When we hear the natural resonance of the dharma 
nature, it does not have any source or any physical, material aspect; it 
is just empty, natural resonance. When we just listen to it, our minds 
relaxed and not altering anything, the sound does not disappear, but 
there is no object to be afraid of nor any way the sound can harm you. 
The sound no longer seems so oppressive in your ears. 
Although Khenpo Gangshar's instructions say to press your eyes 
with your fingers, many physicians say that if you press your eyes in 
this way, it is possible to damage your vision, and if you block your 
ears you might damage your hearing. It is important not to injure 
yourself, but that does not mean you cannot do this practice-you 
do not necessarily have to take your hands and press your eyeballs 
and block your ears. Instead you can clench your jaws hard and 
dose your eyes tight without pressing on them with your fingers, 
and these lights and sounds will appear anyway. You don't necessarily 
have to use your hands. For this reason, you should do this practice, 
but you must not plug your eyes and ears with your fingers. Just 
clench your teeth and dose your eyes tight, and the lights and sounds 
will appear. 
When I received these instructions &om Khenpo Gangshar, he 
placed his two thumbs over my eyes and pressed lightly. He plugged 
my ear holes dosed with his middle fingers. He asked me what I saw, 
203 
FOLLOWING THROUGH IN OUR LIVES 
but at first it was just blackness and I could not see or hear anything 
at all. However, as I let my mind relax and looked to see what ap­
peared to my eyes and listened to the sounds coming through my 
ears, I gradually began to see various lights appear. They were various 
colors and shapes-some reddish, some greenish, some bluish. When 
I relaxed and listened, there was a roaring, thundering sound. 
These lights and sounds are the natural appearance and resonance 
of the dharma nature. When your eyes are closed and your ears 
blocked, you are not looking at or listening to any external object. 
These are just the sounds and lights that naturally happen. When 
they appear, what you should do is rest naturally, looking at their 
nature. When you rest loosely, looking at the nature of the lights or 
the sounds, you see that the lights and sounds are naturally empty. 
When you see that, they are less overwhelming and terrible. 
These lights and sounds are not outside of ourselves, nor are they 
inside, nor between the outside and inside. We cannot find any origin 
from which they arise. When we view them in this way, they dissolve 
into emptiness and any fear we may have experienced at first will 
disappear. We should meditate on these for a long time in order to 
grow accustomed to them. 
The reason we need to getting used to these appearances is that, as 
it says here, the appearances we see at the time of death are no dif­
ferent from these. These lights and sounds will occur. The reason is 
that the eye and ear faculties have ceased functioning at that point. It 
seems pitch black at first, but gradually appearances will arise-the 
natural lights and sounds of the dharma nature will appear. If you 
have practiced and grown accustomed to them, you can rest within 
them and become liberated-they will not harm you. If you are not 
used to them and feel like you have never seen them before, then 
you might feel a bit afraid, wondering what they are. You will be 
frightened by the lights and sounds that naturally come from the 
dharma nature. 
But if you recognize these appearances, as Khenpo Gangshar says, 
it will be like seeing an old acquaintance or a child leaping into his 
mother's lap. You will remember that this is just a natural appear­
ance, that the natural empty sounds and sights of the dharma nature 
204 
TAKING THE BARDO AS THE PATH 
are going to happen and that there is no need to fear them. If you can 
think in this way and rest in meditation within the dharma nature, 
the lights will not overpower you and the sounds will not harm you 
m anyway. 
The instructions continue: 
This teaching corresponds to the key point of darkness 
instruction among the daylight instructions and darkness 
instructions for practicing the manifest aspect of the tho­
gal of spontaneous presence. There are also the systems of 
practice based on the rising and setting rays at daytime and 
on the moonlight, electric light and lamps at nighttime. 
These instructions are the same as the darkness instructions from the 
dzogchen tradition. There are two types of dzogchen practice: trek­
cho, or cutting through, and thogal, or the sudden leap. The primor­
dially pure trekcho practices involve meditating on emptiness and 
the nature of mind itsel£ The thogal practices include meditating 
while looking at sunlight or an electric light in order to see the ap­
pearance of rainbows and drops, which are the daylight instructions. 
There are also practices of darkness instructions where one goes into 
a cave or another pitch-black place and meditates in utter darkness. 
These instructions are essentially the same as the darkness practices 
or a dark retreat. When doing those practices, one sees various lights 
and looks at their essence. The only distinction between these in­
structions and the darkness instructions is how elaborate the instruc­
tions are. The six applications of the Kalachakra practice also include 
daylight and darkness practices, and therefore this practice is similar 
to them, too. One can also do practices that involve looking at lights, 
moonlight, or various different types of lamps. If you want to do any 
of these types of practices then you should get instruction from a 
lama and meditate following their instructions. If you just do it on 
your own without any instructions, it will not be easy and you will 
have many difficulties and problems. This is why you should follow 
the instructions of a master. 
In contrast to these other practices, Khenpo Gangshar's instruc­
tions are concise and easy to follow. He tells us how we should look 
205 
FOLLOWING THROUGH IN OUR LIVES 
at the lights and sounds that appear, but the way to take them as the 
path is the same as the same as before: just rest relaxed within them, 
not altering them in any way. 
TAKING SLEEP AS THE PATH 
Following this come the instructions on taking sleep as the path, 
which are an aid to taking the bardo as the path. There are many 
different practices and instructions for dreams. Generally, during the 
daytime we think about many different things, and then when we 
go to sleep at night, we recognize our dreams. Some of the practices 
then involve doing things like transforming your dreams-taking a 
bad dream and making it into a good dream, or emanating bodies in 
your dreams. There are these and other instructions on dream yogas, 
but Khenpo Gangshar's instructions on taking sleep as the path do 
not involve such mental effort. What are his instructions? 
Without depending on mental effort, such as emanations 
or transformations during the dream state, sleep in a state 
of undistracted naturalness. During that time, you may slip 
into deep sleep devoid of dreams. As soon as you awake 
you are vividly clear in the natural state. This is called the 
luminosity of deep sleep. · 
When you are first going to sleep, rest in equipoise through your 
mindfulness and awareness, and fall asleep within this state. Just sleep 
in the state of awareness, resting naturally within it. If you can sleep 
in this way without being distracted, your awareness is very clear and 
crisp. Sometimes you may sleep very deeply without many dreams 
and with no distraction. Then when you wake up, your mind is viv­
idly clear and sharp within your previous practice and meditation. 
Things occur in your mind, but they do not distract you. You are 
loose and relaxed; there is no disturbance or turbulence during your 
sleep. This is called the luminosity of deep sleep because there are 
imprints of your samadhi. 
Sometimes you might not sleep at all and instead remain very 
alert: 
206 
TAKING THE BARDO AS THE PATH 
It may happen that sleep doesn't occur at all. Instead, you re­
main awake and vividly clear or you fall asleep. But, though 
various dreams take place, they are forgotten the moment 
you wake up the next morning with nothing to remember. 
That is the beginning of having purified dreams. 
Sometimes you maintain your practice when you go to bed, but 
sleep does not come and you rest vividly, clearly, in meditation. Or if 
you do sleep, you might have some dreams, but they do not distract 
you. They do not seem solid or real. This is a sign that they are begin­
ning to be purified. 
It is said, for the person of the highest capacity and dili­
gence, that dreams cease by being forgotten. For the in­
termediate person they cease by being recognized. For the 
person of a lesser capacity they cease through the experi­
ence of excellent dreams. 
For people of the highest capacity, dreams dissolve into emptiness 
and are forgotten. Intermediate people recognize dreams to be 
dreams, after which they stop. People of lower capacity only have 
good dreams, after which they stop. These are the different types 
of experience you might have. 
The fact that dreaming must be purified in the end is com­
monly agreed upon in all the sutras, tantras, and treatises. 
We do need to purify our dreams, as talked about in all the sutras, 
tantras, and treatises. In Khenpo Gangshar's shoner instructions, he 
calls this instruction taking delusion as the path. When we talk about 
delusion in general, we normally mean the delusion included among 
the three poisons of greed, aversion, and delusion. Delusion has the 
aspect of not knowing and misunderstanding- not knowing the way 
the dharma nature is, being ignorant of karma, cause, and effect. But 
that is not what Khenpo Gangshar means when he talks of taking 
delusion as the path. Because sleep is considered a kind of ignorance, 
he means taking sleep as the path. 
When we are going to sleep, it is imponant not to let our minds 
be overcome by distraction. We need to be as mindful and aware 
207 
FOLLOWING THROUGH IN OUR LIVES 
as we can and to try to rest our minds naturally in the essence of 
mind. If we can do this as we fall asleep, our sleep will become clearer 
and clearer; our dreams will become clearer and clearer. In the best 
of cases, when we wake up in the morning we will awaken within 
the nature of the mind itsel£ This is perhaps difficult, but if we can 
be mindful and aware first when we are falling asleep and then 
while we are sleeping, when we wake up we will be able to take it as 
the path. 
Next, Khenpo Gangshar mentions that the instructions on the prac­
tice of phowa have points that relate to taking the bardo as the path. 
The additional points about the practice of phowa should 
be learned from other sources. 
Sometimes when we are practicing, we might suddenly encounter 
obstacles in our lives. At that time, as a method to avoid falling into 
the lower realms of samsara, there are the instructions on phowa. 
There are many additional instructions on the practice of phowa, but 
they are not taught here; you should learn them from other sources. 
The instruction here is to just rest in equipoise within the coemer­
gent mind. 
The method for taking all situations as the path is to rest within 
the essence of the mind. Within our minds, there are three aspects: 
the way things appear, how they are confused, and the way they ac­
tually are. We do not take our difficulties as the path in relation to 
how things appear or are confused, but in relation to how they actu­
ally are. We rest naturally within their nature-the clear and empty 
nature of the mind that is sometimes called the union of clarity and 
emptiness or the union of wisdom and the expanse. We rest within 
this, recognizing it. When we take sickness as the path, we look at the 
essence of the sickness without altering it in ·any way and just rest 
naturally within that. When we take the affiictions as the path, we 
just look at the essence of the greed, aversion, or delusion that has 
occurred. We do not follow the affiiction or block it. We do not try 
to stop our thoughts. Instead, we look at those thoughts and at the 
affiictions that occur, and we rest naturally within their inherently 
empty essence. When we take the bardo as the path, the natural light 
208 
TAKING THE BARDO AS THE PATH 
and resonance of the dharma nature appear, and we rest in equipoise 
within those, not altering them in any way at all. When we take sleep 
as the path, we rest within whatever appearances occur in our sleep, 
relaxing the mind without altering it. The heart of all of these appli­
cations is to rest naturally in the nature of the mind. 
Resting in the nature of the mind is not just the heart of the ap­
plications. The preliminary stage of the analytic meditation of the 
pandita is a method to develop realization while resting within 
the natural state. Resting in the mind-essence is also the essence of 
the main practice, the resting meditation of the kusulu. Simply rest­
ing in the nature of mind without altering anything is a way to de­
velop ultimate experience within ourselves. The essence of taking 
situations as the path is also to rest in meditation within the unal­
tered essence of the mind. In this way, all of these practices come 
down to this same important point: the main method is to just let 
yourself settle naturally into the essence of your mind. 
209 
18 
CLOSING WORDS 
KHENPO GANGSHAR's instructions close with some verses of 
summary and an aspiration prayer: 
These teachings were merely a condensation of the basic 
points of the instructions. 
From the core of realization of all the victorious ones 
and their sons, 
The root advice of the profound points of the new and 
old tantras, 
I have extracted the fresh essence of the profound oral 
instructions 
And written them down concisely in a few words. 
These instructions are a digest that combines all the key points from 
the instructions of the buddhas and bodhisattvas-the victorious ones 
and their children-as well as from the tantras of the Nyingma and 
Sarma traditions. This text also takes the pith of the profound oral in­
structions and presents all of these in a brief and concise manner. 
It is taught that in these times when it is difficult to tame 
beings through the vehicles of effort, 
The teachings of effortless mind will appear. 
By the power of the times, if you practice these points, 
They are a teaching that is easy to apply and devoid 
of error. 
210 
CLOSING WORDS 
Many different instructions and practices require a lot of effort, prep­
aration, and ritual, but we cannot always practice these instructions. 
At such times, we need effortless instructions such as these that are 
easy to practice and have few spots where we could go ·wrong. 
At a time when I saw many reasons 
And was also requested by several eminent people, 
Setting aside elaborate poetry and lengthy expressions, 
This was written by Gangshar Wangpo, a khenpo from 
Shechen, 
Naturally and freely, in a way that is pleasant to hear and 
easy to understand. 
This was written in a simple style that is meant to be easily understood. 
It uses common, ordinary language rather than high philosophical 
language with flowery, eloquent expressions. If for that reason, some 
of his words are not quite right, that is not so important. What is really 
important is that we have instructions that are beneficial and given in 
a way that is easy to understand. 
By the virtue of this, may an infinite number of beings 
Be victorious in the battle with the demigods of platitude, 
May they shine with the majestic brilliance of the essence 
of profound meaning 
And may there be a celebration of a new golden age. 
These are times when there will be difficulties, strife, and danger, and 
many negative thoughts and afflictions will run through our minds. 
May we realize the meaning of these teachings and bring great hap­
piness to the world. 
These teachings are very powerful and helpful. We really need to 
know how to take all ofthe situations of our lives-joy and sorrow, 
the afflictions, illness, and the bardo-as the path. The instructions 
on doing this will help us a great deal. That is why it is important to 
prepare and practice doing them now. If this practice were extremely 
difficult, requiring a lot of effort and involving many complicated 
things, not many people would be able to do it. But the analytic 
meditation of the pandita and the resting meditation of the kusulu 
211 
FOLLOWING THROUGH IN OUR LIVES 
do not require much effort either physically or mentally. If you want 
to make a lot of effort to practice them, that is great, but strenuous 
effort is not necessary. These practices are easy to do, which makes 
them helpful in times of difficulties. 
What is most important is to be able to practice these instructions. 
That is not only necessary, it is also beneficial. In this human life we 
are happy at times, joyful at times-we have no problems and every­
thing goes well. At such times, we should not let our attention be 
drawn away and be overcome by distraction: we need to remember 
the experience of naturally resting in the essence of mind. If we can 
nurture this experience, it will be helpful. At times in our lives it is 
possible that we will have problems and difficulties. We will experi­
ence pain and illness, the afflictions, and the bardo. These happen to 
every single living being, so we need a way to deal with them. At such 
times we should not let ourselves be overwhelmed by the situations 
in our lives. If in those times we are able to remember how to rest in 
the natural state, the practice will help ease us through our difficul­
ties. Whatever we do in this human life, it is important to remember 
to be mindful, aware, and careful, and to rest in the essence of how 
things are. If you can practice these instructions, they will gradually 
bring you many benefits. The more you practice them, the more help­
ful they will be. 
But they are not just helpful in and of themselves: we actually 
need to put some effort into them. We actually need to put them 
into practice. There is a Tibetan saying, "When you walk in the fields, 
you sing tra Ia Ia Ia Ia. When you go into the dark cave, you pray to 
Guru Rinpoche." If just you sing merry songs to yourself when every­
thing is fine and then start saying "Guru Rinpoche, Guru Rinpoche" 
when you encounter a difficult situation, that is too little, too late. If 
you start practicing when things are good, when things turn bad you 
will be better able to handle it. This is why it is important to start 
practicing these instructions now. 
That is the key point. For example, if you are sitting at a table with a 
plate of delicious food in front of you, you don't think, "How should 
I eat this? If I eat this, what will happen in my stomach?" There's 
no need to analyze it logically. Instead, you just eat and fill your 
212 
CLOSING WORDS 
belly. Then your body will feel comfortable. Similarly, it is impor­
tant to actually practice and not just think conceptually about these 
instructions. 
The most important thing is to be as diligent as possible. If we 
can practice with diligence and we encounter no insurmountable 
obstacles, we are very fortunate. There is no way to be too diligent 
about Dharma practice-you cannot practice too much. The more 
you practice, the more it will help you. Such a situation is a wonder­
ful opportunity. But our lives do not always permit this. Sometimes 
you might not have all the right circumstances for practice, or you 
might face difficulties or find yourself in an adverse situation. This 
can happen, and when it does, you should not worry that you cannot 
practice-there is no reason to worry or be depressed. You should 
not think, "Oh poor me! I can't practice Dharma!" That will not help. 
Actually you need to remember that you are extremely fortunate to 
have entered the gate of the Dharma and developed faith and devo­
tion. This alone is a great merit; this alone is a great fortune. It actu­
ally is quite wonderful. 
The Buddha himself taught this in a sutra. If someone feels strong 
faith and devotion, and joins their two hands at their heart in prayer, 
this will bring a great result. It is necessary and beneficial. But what 
if someone who thinks, "Well, Dharma is probably okay," but is 
doubtful and ambivalent about it raises a single hand to their heart 
even without much sincerity or faith, does this have any result? The 
Buddha said that it does. Even raising just a single hand in prayer is 
a great merit and a great fortune. The reason is that we have been 
wandering through samsara since beginningless time, and we have 
never felt much faith or excitement about the Dharma. Raising 
just one hand is the beginning of developing faith, conviction, and 
excitement about the Dharma. It will make good imprints within 
that person, and in the future those imprints will grow stronger and 
stronger, ultimately leading to great results. Here we are taking about 
not merely raising a hand to the heart but actually doing meditation 
practice. This is an especially good fortune! 
213 

APPENDIX 
THE TEXTS OF 
KHENPO GANGSHAR 
WHAT FOLLOWS ARE THE TWO TEXTS BY KHENPO GANGSHAR 
referred to in the text. First are the short instructions, "The Concise 
Mind Instructions Called Naturally Liberating Whatever You Meet," 
written by Khenpo Gangshar in August of 1957 while he was visiting 
Thrangu Monastery in Tibet. In 2005, a handwritten copy of these 
instructions was found in Thrangu Rinpoche's personal library, from 
which this translation was prepared. 
The second text is the slightly longer "Naturally Liberating What­
ever You Meet: Instructions to Guide You on the Profound Path." It 
was written a few weeks after the "Concise Mind Instructions" and ex­
plains in greater detail the points made briefly there. It was translated 
by Erik Perna Kunsang and published in The Crystal Cave (Rangjung 
Yeshe Publications). It has been revised for this volume in coopera­
tion with Erik Perna Kunsang. 
-DAVID KARMA CHOEPHEL 
215 

The Concise Mind Instructions Called 
Naturally Liberating Whatever You Meet 
IF YOU DO VIRTUOUS ACTIONS, happiness will result, and if you 
do unvirtuous actions, suffering will result. This is an unfailing fact, 
so we must identify what we call virtue and misdeed. In order to 
do that, we first need to point out what body, speech, and mind are. 
After recognizing what those are, we need to know which is most 
important in virtues and misdeeds: body, speech, or mind. 
If you ask which is most important, mind is most important. As it 
is said: 
The body is a servant for all good or evil deeds; 
The mind rules over everything like a king. 
The mind is like the king, and the body and speech are like servants. 
Thus if the mind does not think of something, the body cannot pos­
sibly do anything either good or nasty, nor can the speech possibly 
say anything kind or mean. Thus we must recognize that the root 
comes down to the mind. 
Next we must analyze whether the mind is something or noth­
ing. It is not unilaterally something, because it has no color-white, 
yellow, red, or green-and no shape-triangular or square-to be 
· seen. It is not unilaterally nothing, be~;ause this all-knowing, all-aware 
king that does all your thinking and remembering is unceasing. Thus 
as the glorious Rangjung Dorje said, 
Not something, even the victors cannot see it. 
Not nothing, it is the ground of all samsara and nirvana. 
217 
APPENDIX 
This completes the discussion of the preliminaries. 
For the main practice, let the mind and body be comfortable, 
soft, and relaxed. Do not think of anything, let yourself settle nat­
urally, and look up with your eyes into space. Open your mouth 
slightly and let the breath flow naturally. At that point, without any 
concern about what you are thinking, what you remember, what is 
nice or what is painful, this mind-essence is clear and expansive, vivid 
and naked. This is the nature of the minds of all sentient beings of 
the three realms. This is the heart of the glorious master, the supreme 
guide. This is what the buddhas of the three times intend. It is also 
called the dharmakaya mahamudra. It is also called the luminous 
great perfection. It is also called the path and result. It is also called 
emptiness and compassion. It can be given many names, but they all 
point a finger at just this. 
Thus it is as the glorious Rangjung Dorje said, 
Everything's not true, not false, 
Like moons in water, say the wise. 
This ordinary mind itself 
Is dharma expanse, the victors' essence. 
Directly, whatever arises, do not change it-rest naturally. This fulfills 
the essence of all creation stages, completion stages, mantra recita­
tions, and meditations. 
Here you must differentiate between being distracted and not 
being distracted. If you are undistracted and natural, there can be nei­
ther help nor harm. That is awareness. If you get slightly distracted, 
it is possible that likes or dislikes might arise in your mind. On top 
of that, you accumulate white or black karma. Because of that, you 
wander in samsara. For this reason you must distinguish mind and 
awareness. Mind and thought are like cloud banks and must be puri­
fied. You must rely on inner awareness. 
You must take sickness as the path, afflictions as the path, the bardo 
as the path, and delusion as the path. The heart of all these applica­
tions is to rest naturally in the essence. 
There's no need to bore you now. 
218 
THE TEXTS OF KHENPO GANGSHAR 
This was kindly given by Gangshar Wangpo, who is both 
learned and accomplished, to the assembled students of 
Thrangu Tashi Chafing's school Shedrup Dargye Ling 
on the seventh day of the sixth month of the Fire-Bird 
year (August 3, 1957). Mangalam. Translated by David 
Karma Choephel in Boudhanath, Nepal, March, 2007. 
219 

Naturally Liberating Whatever Yo.u Meet: 
Instructions to Guide You on the Profound Path 
WITH THE DEVOTION of self-knowing I pay homage to Guru Vaj­
radhara. 
A worthy student is one who aspires to practice the profoundest 
of the profound and secret vajrayana-the essential oral inst:ru,ctions 
of all the anuttara yoga tantras or the nature of the realization of 
effortless ati. To meet the needs of such a student, these three points 
should be taught: 
• The preliminary steps of mind training. 
• The main practice of pointing out. 
• The subsequent application, combining the profound advice 
into key points. 
The first of these is in two parts: the general preliminaries and the 
special preliminaries, which represent the unique qualities of this 
particular path. 
THE GENERAL PRELIMINARIES 
First of all, you should practice the following steps according to the 
general teachings: 
• Taking refuge, which is the difference between this path and an 
incorrect path. 
• Arousing bodhichitta, which raises you above the inferior paths. 
221 
APPENDIX 
• The meditation and recitation ofVajrasattva, which purifies mis­
deeds, obscurations, and adverse conditions that prevent the 
essence of refuge and bodhichitta from dawning in your being. 
• The mandala offering, which is the method for gathering the 
accumulations-the harmonious conditions. 
• Guru yoga, the root of blessings and the means by which the 
special qualities of experience and realization quickly arise in 
your being. 
THE SPECIAL PRELIMINARIES 
Next, the special preliminaries, which, according to this system of 
teachings, are called the analytic meditation of a pandita. 
It is an unfailing fact that happiness results from virtuous action 
and that suffering results from having committed unvirtuous kar­
mic deeds. Therefore, you must first recognize what is virtuous and 
what is evil. In order to do this you must determine which is most 
important: your body, speech, or mind. To decide this, you must 
understand what your body, speech, and mind are. 
The "body" is your physical body that serves as the support for ben­
efit and for harm. "Speech" is the making of sounds and talking. The 
"mind" is that which can think of and recollect anything at all-that 
which feels like or dislike and at every moment shows different ex­
pressions of joy and sorrow. This briefly explains the body, speech, 
and mind. 
When you commit a virtuous or evil action, you must ask your­
self, "Is the body the main thing? Is speech the primary aspect? 
Or is the mind most important?" Some people will reply that it is 
the body, some that it is speech, and some will say that the mind is the 
primary aspect. In any case, whoever claims that the body or speech 
is most important has not really penetrated to the core with their 
examination. 
It is the mind that is the most important. The reason is that unless 
your mind intends to do so, your body cannot possibly do anything 
good or bad. Nor can your voice express anything good or evil. Your 
mind is therefore the primary factor. As it is said, 
222 
THE TEXTS OF KHENPO GANGSHAR 
The mind rules over everything like a king, 
The body is a servant for all good or evil deeds. 
In that way your mind is like a king and both your body and speech 
are its servants. For instance, when you get angry at your enemy 
you must examine whether the primary factor is your mind or 
the enemy. Similarly, when you feel attached to a friend, examine 
whether your mind or the friend is the primary factor. Examining 
in this way, you must acknowledge that although the friend and 
enemy are the circumstances in which attachment and anger arise, 
the real cause originates in your own mind. Thus, your mind is most 
important. 
Once you master you own mind, neither friend nor enemy will 
be able to benefit you or cause you harm. If you don't gain control 
over your mind, attachment and anger will automatically well up, 
wherever you go and wherever you stay. You must understand that 
your mind is the root of all joy and sorrow, good and evil, attachment 
and anger. The Great Omniscient One (Longchenpa) has said, 
When under the influence of dhatura, 
All the various experiences you have, whatever they 
maybe, 
Are all, in fact, mistaken images without existence. 
Likewise, understand that under the influence of a 
confused mind 
All the mistaken experiences of the six classes of beings, 
whatever they may be, 
Are all empty images, nonexistent yet appearing. 
Since they appear in your mind and are constructed by 
your mind, 
Exert yourself in taming this mistaken mind. 
That is how it is. But you shouldn't take your understanding from 
books or stories heard from others. Recognize, yourself, that ap­
pearance is mind and understand that your mind is the root of all 
phenomena. 
In this context, you must distinguish between appearance (nangwa) 
223 
APPENDIX 
and the perceived object (nang-yul). Without doing that, it will be 
like the Great Omniscient One stated, 
Ignorant people claim that everything is mind. 
They are deluded about the three types of appearance, 
Have many shortcomings, mix things up and overexaggerate. 
Meditators, give up such unwholesome ways! 
The mere presence of visible forms, sounds, and so forth, that are 
the objects of the six types of consciousness is called "perceived 
objects." Thoughts of attachment, anger, or delusion based on the 
"perceived objects" are "appearances," for example, the feeling of at­
tachment to a pleasant object, the feeling of anger toward an unpleas­
ant one and the indifferent feeling toward something neutral. You 
must understand that such appearances are the functions of your 
own mind. 
Perceived objects, such as form, sound, and so forth, have appeared 
due to mind, but they are not mind-they are the shared appear­
ances of sentient beings and do not possess any true existence, besides 
being phenomena of dependent origination. 
You should now examine where this mind dwells: from the top 
of the hair on your head to the nails on your toes; from the outer 
layer of skin, the flesh in between, to the bones, five organs, and 
six vessels within. When investigating the dwelling place of mind, 
most Chinese will claim that it abides in the head. Tibetans will say 
that it dwells in the heart. Neither one is sure because when you 
touch the top of the head the mind seems to leap there and when 
you touch the soles of the feet it seems to jump there. It has no fixed 
place. It dwells neither in outer objects nor inside the body, nor in 
the empty space in between. You must become certain that it has no 
dwelling place. 
If your mind has a dwelling place, what are the outer, inner, and 
middle aspects of this dwelling place? Is it identical with or different 
from the dweller? 
If they are identical- since there is increase or decrease, change 
and alteration in outer objects and within the body-your mind 
224 
THE TEXTS OF KHENPO GANGSHAR 
will change in the very same way. So it is illogical to think they 
are identical. 
If they are different, then is the essence of this different mind 
something that exists or not? If it is, then it should at least have a 
shape and color. Since there is no shape or color, it does not unilater­
ally exist. However, since this "Ever-conscious and Ever-aware King" 
is unceasing, it does not unilaterally not exist. For this reason the 
glorious Karmapa Rangjung Dorje proclaimed, 
It is not existent since even the victorious ones do not 
see it. 
It is not nonexistent since it is the basis of samsara and 
mrvana. 
This is not a contradiction, but the middle way of unity. 
May we realize the nature of mind, free from extremes. 
The explanation up to this point completes the preliminary teach­
ings of the analytical meditation of a pandita. 
THE MAIN PART OF THE PRACTICE 
The second part, the steps of the teachings on the main part of the 
practice, the resting meditation of a kusulu, is presented under two 
points: 
• Pointing out the nature of body, speech, and mind by means of 
the instruction in resolving. 
· Pointing out (dualistic) mind and awareness, one by one, by 
means of the instruction in distinguishing. 
RESOLVING 
Keep your body straight, refrain from talking, open your mouth 
slightly, and let the breath flow naturally. 
Don't pursue the past and don't invite the future. Simply rest natu­
rally in the naked ordinary mind of the immediate present without 
225 
APPENDIX 
trying to correct it or "re-place" it. If you rest like that, your mind­
essence is clear and expansive, vivid and naked, without any concerns 
about thought or recollection, joy or pain. That is awareness (rigpa). 
At the same time, there is no thought of, "Sights and sounds are 
out there." Everything appears uncea,singly. There is also no thought 
of, "The perceiver, the six types of consciousness, is within." Clear 
and nonconceptual naked awareness is unceasing. 
While in that state, your body is left to itself without fabrication, 
free and easy. That is the body of all the victorious ones. That is the 
essence of the creation stage. 
Your speech is free from fabrication, without efforts to track down 
the root of sound but simply expressing directly and openly whatever 
comes to mind. It is all-pervasive from the very moment of being 
heard, a nonarising empty resounding. That is the speech of all the 
victorious ones. It is the essence of all recitation. 
When you rest your mind in unfabricated naturalness, no matter 
what thought may arise, good or evil, happy or sad, the mind-essence, 
which is free from concerns about joy or sorrow, is clear and empty, 
naked and awake. 
This mind-essence is the nature of all sentient beings, the realiza­
tion of the buddhas of the three times, the essence of the eighty-four 
thousand Dharma-doors and the heart of the glorious master, the 
supreme guide. It is the transcendent knowledge of the second set of 
teachings and the sugata-essence of the last turning of the wheel of 
the Dharma. According to the general system of mantra it is called 
continuity of ground, the spontaneously present mandala of the innate 
nature. According to the anuttara tantras it is called Guhyasamaja, 
Chakrasamvara, Kalachakra, and so forth. 
As for the three inner tantras: according to mahayoga, it is the great 
dharmakaya of the exalted inseparability of the two truths. According 
to anuyoga, it is the basic mandala of bodhichitta of the "son of great 
bliss." According to atiyoga, it is the great perfection of awareness 
and emptiness. 
All these renowned expressions point a finger at this mind-essence 
itself, and nothing else. This point is also presented in the Gelug 
school, as stated by the Great Lord (Tsongkhapa), 
226 
THE TEXTS OF KHENPO GANGSHAR 
Appearance, the unfailing dependent origination, 
And emptiness, understanding beyond statements­
As long as these two seem to be separate, 
You have still not realized the intent of Shakyamuni. 
When all at once and without alternation 
Your conviction and your notion of an object fall apan, 
That is the moment of having completed the analysis 
of the view. 
The Lord of Dharma, Drakpa Gyaltsen, has said, 
When you have clinging, it is not the view. 
The Dharma masters of the Sakya school regard their view of un­
divided samsara and nirvana to be nonfixation. Moreover, accord­
ing to the matchless Kagyupa masters, glorious Rangjung Dorje 
proclaimed, 
Everything's not true, not false, 
Like moons in water, say the wise. 
This ordinary mind itself 
Is dharma expanse, the victors' essence. 
Thus, the luminous mahamudra is also nonfixation. It is said that all 
the learned and accomplished masters of India and Tibet had the 
same realization and there is not a single master who claims that the 
realization of the main pan of practice is anything other than non fix­
ation. That is the meaning you should understand yourself and what 
you should point out to others. 
This completes the section that indicates that your body, speech, 
and mind are the Body, Speech, and Mind (of the victorious ones). 
It has the same meaning as in the verses by the Great Master of 
Uddiyana, beginning with, "Do this toward all that you see," and 
so forth. 
DISTINGUISHING 
It is very important to distinguish the difference between mind (sem) 
and awareness (rigpa). The Great Omniscient·One said, 
227 
APPENDIX 
The big oxen pretending to know ati nowadays 
Claim that discursive thinking is awakened mind. 
Such ignorant people, in their realm of darkness, 
Are far away from the meaning of the natural 
Great Perfection. 
If you fail to distinguish between mind and awareness you may en­
gage in conduct that confuses cause and result and thus turn away 
from the path in which view and conduct are united. 
When experiencing the continuity of undistracted naturalness, 
awareness is free from a reference point, like sky, without even a speck 
of joy or sorrow, hope or fear, benefit or harm, whether you meet with 
positive or negative conditions. The character of (dualistic) mind is 
evident the moment you get slightly distracted and encounter (the 
same) conditio~s and you feel joy or sorrow. Having given rise to joy 
or sorrow, you will accumulate karmic actions. 
For example, mind (sem) is like the clouds gathering in the sky. 
Therefore, you must gain stability in awareness (n'gpa), which is like 
a cloudless sky. You must be able to purify the aspect of mind that is 
like the douds in the sky. 
Through this you will be able to separate mind and awareness. 
THE PROFOUND ADVICE 
The third part explains the profound advice on the subsequent ap­
plication, which is based on the oral instructions that reveal direct 
self-liberation. 
While you remain in undistracted naturalness it is utterly impos­
sible to accumulate karma and you have cut the stream of the further 
accumulation of karma. Although you are not accumulating (new) 
karma, do not get the idea that there is neither good nor evil to be 
experienced as (past) karma ripens. That is, unless you purify all the 
karmic deeds you have previously accumulated through confession, 
purification, and so forth, they will ripen without fail. The ripening 
of karma is still possible. 
This ripening will manifest in your body or mind and nowhere 
228 
THE TEXTS OF KHENPO GANGSHAR 
else. When it ripens in your body you will fall sick. When it ripens 
in your mind you will feel joy or sorrow and the thoughts of the six 
types of disturbing emotions will arise. When that happens, it is im­
ponant to possess the oral instructions on taking sickness as the path, 
taking joy and sorrow as the path, taking disturbing emotions as the 
path, and so forth. But, if you simply rest in naturalness, the essence 
of all these applications, it will suffice. 
If you feel happy when meeting with good conditions and sad 
when encountering negative circumstances and indulge in the feel­
ing of happiness when happy and the feeling of sadness when sad, 
you will accumulate immense karma. Therefore, you must immedi­
ately recognize a thought, be it happy or sad, in any circumstances, 
positive or negative. 
After recognition, you should rest in naturalness. Look into the 
one who feels happy or sad, without repressing one feeling or encour­
aging the other. Your clear, empty, and naked mind-essence, free from 
any concern about joy or sorrow, freely becomes the innate state of 
awareness. 
Funhermore, when your body falls sick, don't indulge in the ill­
ness, but rest in naturalness. Look into the painful sensation itsel£ 
The pain doesn't cease when resting like that. However, you will 
directly realize the innate state of awareness free from any thought 
about where it hurts, what hurts, how it hurts, as well as the subject 
and object of the pain. At that moment the sickness grows less in­
tense and becomes somewhat insubstantial. 
A person who has one disturbing emotion will also possess the 
others. But due to the differences in people, some will have more 
anger, some more stinginess, some more dullness, some more desire, 
some more envy, and some will have a greater ponion of pride. That 
is why there are different types of buddha families. 
The disturbing emotion of anger is an agitated state of mind caused 
by a painful sensation based on an unpleasant object. 
Stinginess is the inability to give away to others some attractive 
object because of retaining a tight clinging to owning it. 
Dullness is like darkness and is the root of all evil. It is the lack of 
recognizing one's essence and it obscures the nature of things. 
229 
APPENDIX 
Desire is to accept, long for, and feel attached to pleasant things 
like sights or sounds and so forth. In particular, carnal lust for the 
union of male and female is the primary attachment. 
Envy is to reject and therefore disapprove of the virtues of someone 
who is higher than or equal to onesel£ 
Pride is to regard others as lower and to feel superior in either reli­
gious or mundane matters. 
These six disturbing emotions create the causes for the existence 
of the six classes of beings, such as rebirth in the hells through pre­
dominant anger. Whenever one of them arises you must recognize 
it immediately. When recognizing it, don't reject it, don't accept it, 
just rest in naturalness [looking] into that particular disturbing emo­
tion. At that same moment it is self-liberated and is called mirror-like 
wisdom, etc. This is mentioned in a song from the Second Treasury of 
Ratna Lingpa: 
The essence of your angry mind is clear awareness, 
Bright and empty the moment you recognize it. 
This nature is called mirror-like wisdom. 
Young maid, let's rest in the natural state. 
The essence of your dull mind is clear self-awareness, 
Wide open the moment you look into your natural face. 
This vital nature is called dharmadhatu wisdom. 
Young maid, let's rest in the natural state. 
The essence of your proud mind is the unfolding of 
self-awareness, 
Naturally empty the moment you rest, looking into your 
natural face. 
This state is called the wisdom of equality. 
Young maid, let's rest in the natural state. 
The essence of your lustful mind is attachment for sure, 
The state of empty bliss, the moment you sustain it 
without clinging. 
This nature is called discriminating wisdom. 
Young maid, let's rest in the natural state. 
230 
THE TEXTS OF KHENPO GANGSHAR 
That is how it is. But if you regard disturbing emotions as faults and 
reject them, they may be temporarily suppressed but not cut from 
their root. Consequently, at some point, the poisonous remnant will 
reemerge, as is the case of the mundane dhyana states. On the one 
hand, when you regard disturbing emotions as emptiness, your prac­
tice turns into "taking emptiness as the path" and not the disturb­
ing emotions. Thus your practice doesn't become the short path, the 
special quality of mantra. On the other hand, if you indulge in the 
disturbing emotions, thinking they are something concrete, it is like 
eating a poisonous plant and is the cause that binds you to samsara, 
just like the copulation of ordinary people. 
For these reasons, just as poison can be extracted from a poisonous 
plant and taken as a medicine, the special quality of this teaching lies 
in the fact that any disturbing emotion that may arise is wisdom the 
moment you relax in naturalness. Look directly into it, don't delib­
erately reject it, regard it as a fault, indulge in it concretely, or regard 
it as a virtue. 
Beyond this, if you are interested in the system of direct instruc­
tions, such as the teachings on the path of means, you must learn 
them in detail from the oral instructions of your master. 
TAKING THE BARDO STATE AS THE PATH 
When you press your fingers on your ears or on your eyes, sounds 
naturally resound and colors and lights naturally manifest. Rest natu­
rally for a long time and grow accustomed to the appearance of ut­
terly empty forms that don't exist anywhere-neither outside, inside, 
nor in between. Since, at the time of death, there is nothing other 
than this, you will recognize these sounds, colors, and lights as your 
self-display and be liberated, just like meeting a person you already 
know or a child leaping onto its mother's lap. 
This teaching corresponds to the key point of darkness instruction 
among the daylight instructions and darkness instructions for practicing 
the manifest aspect of the thogal of spontaneous presence. There are 
also the systems of practice based on the rising and setting rays at day­
time and on the moonlight, electric light and lamps at nighttime. 
231 
APPENDIX 
TAKING SLEEP AS THE PATH 
Without depending on mental effort, such as emanations or trans­
formations during the dream state, sleep in a state of undistracted 
naturalness. During that time, you may slip into deep sleep devoid 
of dreams. As soon as you awake you are vividly clear in the natural 
state. This is called the luminosity of deep sleep. 
It may happen that sleep doesn't occur at all. Instead, you remain 
awake and vividly clear or you fall asleep. But, though various dreams 
take place, they are forgotten the moment you wake up the next 
morning with nothing to remember. That is the beginning of having 
purified dreams. 
It is said, for the person of the highest capacity and diligence, that 
dreams cease by being forgotten. For the intermediate person they 
cease by being recognized. For the person of a lesser capacity they 
cease through the experience of excellent dreams. The fact that dream­
ing must be purified in the end is commonly agreed upon in all the 
sutras, tantras, and treatises. 
The additional points about the practice of phowa should be 
learned from other sources. 
These teachings were merely a condensation of the basic points of 
the instructions. 
From the core of realization of all the victorious ones and 
their sons, 
The root advice of the profound points of the new and 
old tantras, 
I have extracted the fresh essence of the profound oral 
instructions 
And written them down concisely in a few words. 
It is taught that in these times when it is difficult to tame 
beings through the vehicles of effort, 
The teachings of effortless mind will appear. 
By the power of the times, if you practice these points, 
They are a teaching that is easy to apply and devoid 
of error. 
232 
THE TEXTS OF KHENPO GANGSHAR 
At.a time when I saw many reasons 
And was also requested by several eminent people, 
Setting aside elaborate poetry and lengthy expressions, 
This was written by Gangshar Wangpo, a khenpo from 
Shechen, 
Naturally and freely, in a way that is pleasant to hear and 
easy to understand. 
By the virtue of this, may an infinite number of beings 
Be victorious in the battle with the demigods of platitude, 
May they shine with the majestic brilliance of the essence 
of profound meaning 
And may there be a celebration of a new golden age. 
SARVA DAKALAYANAM BHAVANTU 
Translated in accordance with the oral teachings ofTulku 
Urgyen Rinpoche at Nagi Gompa, 1984, by Erik Pema 
Kunsan~ Edited by Ward Brisick, 1989. Revised 2009. 
233 
Bibliography 
The Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa (Tsang Nyon Heruka). Author's 
own translation. 
The Third Karmapa Rangjung Dorje. "The Aspiration Prayer of the Maha­
mudra of Definitive Meaning~ The Kagyu Mon/am Book. 2nd edition. 
Woodstock, N.Y.: KTD Publications, 2010. 
--."A Treatise on Buddha Nature." In On Buddha Essence by Khenchen 
Thrangu. Boston: Shambhala Publications, 2006. In Tibetan, karmapa 
rang byung rdo rje 'I gsung 'bum. Vol. 7, 289-98. zi ling: tshur phu mkhan 
po lo yag bkra shis, 2006. 
Padmakara Translation Group, trans. The Way of the Bodhisattva. By Shan­
tideva. Revised edition. Boston: Shambhala Publications, 2006. 
Sakya Pandita Kun dga' rgyal mtshan. Treasure of Valzd Logic (tshad ma 
rig gter). Chapter 4, "The Chapter on the Examination of Proofs and 
Exclusions~ bod ljongs mi dmangs dpe skrun khang, 1989. 
234 
Index 
abhidharma, 46, 98 
accumulation of merit and wisdom, 
39-40 
afflicted mind. See consciousness: af­
flicted mind 
affliction(s), 72., 81, 12.4.138, 183,188,189, 
l.OQ-2.01 
buddha families and, 184, 2.2.9 
cause of, 16, 68-69, 88, 172. 
emotions not included in, 182.-83, 
197 
emptiness and, 71, 183-84, 189-90, 
195 
indulging in, 195--96 
Ratna Lingpa's instructions on, 
191--94 
suppressing, 194--95 
taken as the path, 173-74, 182.--94, 
196-97. 2.08, 2.!8, 2.2.9-31 
three methods for dealing with, 
194--96 
See also poisons 
afflictive obscurations. See obscura-
tions: afflictive and cognitive 
aggregate of consciousness, 98 
aggregate of formations, 98--99 
iilaya. See consciousness: all·ground 
all-ground. See consciousness: all-
ground 
analytic meditation of a pandita, 
43-112., 2.2.2.-2.5 
direct perception and, 108--9 differing from middle-way logic, 94. 
96--97 
differing from tranquility medita­
tion, 12.0 
as a preliminary, 43-44, 2.09, 2.2.2. 
seeing the nature of the mind in, 
43-44. 107-8 
strenuous effort not necessary for, 
l.II-12. 
transcendent intelligence as goal of, 
138-39 
anger, 38, 12.4. 184. 188, 191, 2.2.9, 2.30 
definition of, 185 
mind as primary factor for, 6o, 65, 85, 
2.2.3-2.4 
taken as the path, 174. 183-84. 189-90 
See also aversion 
anuttara yoga tantra. See unexcelled 
yoga tantra 
anuyoga, 140, 2.26 
appearances 
and dependent origination, 141-42., 
172.,180, 2.2.7 
and emptiness, 103, 141-42., 151, 180, 
2.2.7 
are mind, 2.0; 79-83, 92, 97, 102.-3, 169, 
2.2.4 
as differentiated from perceived ob­
jects, 83-85, 88, 9Q-93, 2.2.3-34 
in death and bardo, 2.oo-202., 2.04 
three types of, 84-85, 22.4 
ati, atiyoga, 22.-23, 140, 159 
235 
INDEX 
attachment, 85, 62-63, 223. See also 
desire 
attentiveness, mindfulness and, 164-65. 
See also awareness, mindfulness 
and 
aversion 
classified as appearance, 85 
emptiness and, 73, 149 
mental consciousness and, 88-89,97 
mind as primary factor for, 55, 6o, 62, 
6s,8o,91 
unvirtuous actions caused by, 53 
self-clinging causing, 68-69, 172 
awareness (rigpa), ix, 125, 129, 150,166, 
177. 180, 191, 199. 206, 226, 229, 230 
definition of, xs8-s9. 161 
distinguishing from mind, 19, 121, 
158-62,166, 218, 225-26,227-28 
mind as clear awareness, 55-56, 99 
recogni'zing, 162-64 
whether the mahamudra tradition 
has instructions on distinguishing 
from mind, 164-65 
awareness, mindfulness and, 37, 146-47, 
176, 206. See also attentiveness 
bardo, 168, 173, 190, 199-205, 208, 2n, 
212, 218, 231 
Beru, Sherab Palden, 4-5 
bodhichitta 
motivation and, 2, 
preliminaries and, 35-36, 221-22 
relative, 9, 31, 64 
ultimate, 31, 159-60 
body 
as body of the Buddha, 145, 151 
death and 199, 201, 
of the deity, 133-34, 148-49 
identified as self, 70 
as metaphor for meditation, ns 
mind's location in, 97-100 
mind's primacy over, ss-s9. 217, 
222-24 
posture for meditation, 122 brain, 13, s6, 97-99. 201 
breath, 64. 122 
Buddha, ix, s. 22, 33, 35, 41, 51, 65-68, 136, 
137-38 
buddha families, 184-85, 229 
buddha nature, 72-74, 124, 137-38, 140, 
151-53 
certainty 
conceptual, 16, 95, 195 
conceptual vs. experiential, 44 
developing through study, 75, II7 
from faith, 46 
in selflessness, 70 
Chogyam Trungpa Rinpoche. See 
Trungpa Rinpoche, Chogyam 
circumstantial conditions, 50 
Clarifying the Natural State, 82-83, n7, 
146,165 
coemergent appearance, mind-essence 
and thought, 82-83 
cognitive obscurations. See obscura-
.tions: afflictive and cognitive 
completion stage, 35, 75, 218 
completing karma, 48-49 
conceptual understanding. See under­
standing 
Concise Mind Instructions Called 
Naturally Liberating Whatever 
You Meet, ix, xiii, 14, 215, 
217-19 
conduct, 65, 161, 228 
consciousness, xi, 90, 98, 200 
afflicted mind (seventh conscious­
ness), 87,88 
all-ground (eighth consciousness), 
87-90 
eight, 87-88, 99, 201 
mental, 86, 89, 97, 108, 150 
objects of, 85-86, 88, 129, 224 
sense, 85-89, 108, 129 
six, 84-90, 128-29, 224, 226 
transference of, 22 (see also phowa) 
types of, 85-87 
INDEX 
creation stage, Io-11, 35, 75, 133-34. 145, 
149. 2.01, 2.2.6 
Dalai Lama, s6 
darkness and daylight instructions, 
2.0S, 2.31 
death, 32.-34, 167, 172., 190, 199--2.04, 2.31 
development stage. See creation stage 
delusion, Ss, SS, IS9-60, 1SS, 192. 
taken as the path, 1S2.-S6, 2.07 
dependent origination, 90, 141-42., 22.4, 
217. See also interdependence 
depression, 19S 
desire, 6S, 1S4, 1S6-SS, 193, 230 
devotion, 15-16, 4o-41, II3-I6 
dharma body. See dharmakaya 
dharma expanse, 2.1, 77, 105, 12.4, 143, 
2.1S, 2.2.7 
dharma nature, 2.o-21, 77, 126, 13S, 2.01, 
2.02.-4. See also nature of mind 
dharmadhtitu. See dharma expanse 
dharmadhatu wisdom, 192., 197, 2.30 
dharmakaya, 8-10, 2.0, S3, 140, 15o-51, 
2.IS, 2.2.6. 
dharmatli. See dharma nature 
dhatura, 7S-79, 2.23 
diligence, 66, 73, So, 2.13 
increasing, 33, 34, 41, n3-14, 
as method to develop practice, 37, 
40 
direct perception, S6, 108-9 
of nature of the mind, 77, 94, 108-9 
discriminating wisdom, 193,197, 2.30 
distraction, liS, 12.1, ISS-6s 
vs. nondistraction, 15S 
disturbing emotions. See afflictions 
Drakpa Gyaltsen, 142.-43, 2.2.7 
dreams, 2.06-S, 2.32. 
drogchen, 19, 2.2-2.4, 93, 140, ISS-61, 
163-65, 170, 205. See also great per­
fection 
ego-clinging, 9--10, 69. See also selt: 
clinging eight consciousnesses. See conscious­
ness: eight 
eighth consciousness. See conscious­
ness: all-ground 
eighty-four thousand Dharmas, 16, 136, 
216 
eighty-four mahasiddha5, 23, 156 
Eliminating the Darkness of Ignorance, 
S2 
emanation body, 8-10 
emptiness 
afflictions, and, 195--96 
of the individual and phenomena, 16 
interdependence and, 95, 141-42., 217 
logic and, 44, 76, 156 
middle way and, 96, 102., 131 
of the mind, 76-77, 96--97, 101-6, 12.6, 
13S 
second wheel and, 71-73, 137 
spontaneous presence of, 102.-3 
third wheel and, 73-75, 13S 
union of clarity and, 77, 12.3, 11S, 142. 
union of sound and, 134 
ultimate bodhicitta and, 31 
unhelpfulness of the view of, 15 
enemies, 3, 4, 6o, 62.-63, 65, 1S3, 2.2.3 
enjoyment body, 8-10, 2.1 
envy, 1S5, 1S7, 193, 2.30. See also jealousy 
equipoise, 111-12, 12.6, 133-34. 157-58, 
206 
excitement 
about dharma nature, 21, 
about practice, 2.5-2.9 
experience 
of external things as mind, 91--92. 
inexpressible, 117 
of the nature of the mind, 44. 77, SI, 
96""97. 10S-9, 128 
and realization, 4o-41, 168, 173 
extremes, 6s-66, 106 
faith 
2.37 beneficial effects of, 2.13 
in the Dharma,z.s,31-3Z. 
INDEX 
faith (continued) 
guru yoga and, 4o-41 
in karma, 45-46 
in the lama and his instructions, 
113-16 . 
First Wheel, 67--68, 74, 96, 137 
Five Treasuries of jamgon Kongtul Lor­
dro Thaye, 6-7 
four thoughts that turn the mind, 
31-34 
Fundamental WISdom of the Middle Way, 
The, 94 
Gelug school, 141-42., 2.2.6 
great perfection, 2.2.-2.3, 140, 159--6o, 2.18, 
zz6, 2.2.8. See also dzogchen 
great seal, 154. See also mahamudra 
greed, 53, 88-89, 182.-84, 186-87, 193. See 
also desire; lust 
guilt, 83, 182., 197-98 
guru(s), zo-2.1, 35· See also lamas 
Guru Rinpoche, 8-9, 11-12., 147, 149, 
190, 2.12. 
guru yoga, 4o-41, 2.2.2. 
happiness, 34. 45. 52.-55. 6z, 64, 107, 
177-78 
hatted, 63. See also anger; aversion 
Hevajra Tantra, 12.6 
homage, zo-2.1 
hope and fear, 162.--63 
Hundred Thousand Songs ofMilarepa, 
89 
impermanence,32.-34 
inference, 44, 46, 81, 94, 96, 12.7-2.8 
insight meditation, 37, 8z, 109 
tranquility meditation and, 116, 117, 
12.0 
intelligence 
in insight meditation, 117, 12.0 
of meditation, 145 
that realizes selflessness, 10, 136 
three types of, 12.7-2.8 as translation of shes rab, xi 
See also transcendent intelligence 
intention, 46-47, 5o-54 
distinguishing between good and 
bad, 53 
See also motivation 
interdependence, 74, 90-91, 94-95, 103, 
142., 172.. See also dependent origi­
nation 
jamgon Kongttul Lodro Thaye, 6-7, 19, 
IJD-JI, 147-48 
Jataka tales, 51 
jealousy, 150, 182., 188-89, 193, 197. See 
also envy 
jntinti. See wisdom 
joy and sorrow, 55, 65, 162.--64, 168, 
171-73. 175-78, 2.2.8-2.9 
Kagyu lineage, 19, 12.4. 139, 143-44, 
154-55,2.2.7 
Kalachakra, 138-39, 2.05, 2.2.6 
karma, 45--61, 68, 107, 161, 163, 169-73, 
2.2.8-2.9 
distinguishing prior karma and pres­
ent circumstances, 49-50 
Karmapa Rangjung Dorje, 85, 143, 2.18, 
2.2.7 
Aspiration Prayer ofMahamudra, 
zz-zJ, 104-5, 2.17, 2.2.5 
Karmapa. Sixteenth, 181 
Karmapa Wangchuk Dorje, Ninth, 
81-82.,169 
Khenchen Lodro Rabsel, 6 
Khenpo Gangshar 
as terton, 12. 
composing Naturally Liberating 
Whatever You Meet, xiii, 5, 19, zu 
death of,18 
life and teachings of, 6-18, 146 
prophecies of, 8-10 
Thrangu Rinpoche and, ix-x, 3, 14. 18, 
131, 18o-81, 2.03-4 
Trungpa Rinpoche and, 7, 12.-13, 18 
INDEX 
kiesha, translation of, 182. See also 
affliction 
kusulu, meaning of, 43, III 
lama(s) 
and guru yoga, 4o-41 
rebinhs of, 13-14 
seeing faults in, 114-15 
See also guru(s) 
Langdarma, King, 28, 139 
Lingpas, 190 
logic, 16, 44. 71-73, 94, 105-6, 156 
lojong, 64. See also mind training 
Longchen Rabjam, 78-80, 84, 159, 
223 
luminosity 
of deep sleep, 206, 232 
ground and path, 201 
natural, 202 
See also radiance 
lust, 186, 193, 196, 230 
Machig Labdron, 122 
mahamudra, 16, 19, 22-24, 81-84. See 
also great seal 
Mahamudra: The Ocean of Certainty, 
82,169 
mahasiddha(s), 23-24,156-57 
mahayoga, 140, 226 
mandala, 185 
mandala offering, 38-41, 138-40, 185, 
222,226 
mantra, 134 
Marpa the translator, 1,114-15,127, 
154-55,167 
meditation, distinguishing from no 
meditation, 159 
mental consciousness. See conscious- · 
ness: mental 
middle way school, 16, 23, 44. 71-72, 94, 
96, 104-6, 131 
Milarepa, 33, 89-90, 114-15, 154-55 
mind 
appearances are, 20, 78-85, 90-93 beyond existence and nonexistence, 
104-6 
differentiated from awareness, 19, 121, 
158-66,218,225,227-28 
as "ever-conscious and ever-aware 
king," 102, 105 
emptiness of, 76-77. 96-97, 101-6, 
126,138 
knowing aspect of, 125, 127-28 
location of, 97-101 
luminosity of, 151 
methods for resting the, n8-19 
perceived objects differentiated 
from, 84, 9~3 
primacy of, 54-63, 65 
spontaneous presence of, 142 
resting in unaltered, 124, 130, 148 
in stillness and movement, 
91-92 
taming, 7, 10, 65-66, n9 
thoughts as display of, 90 
training, 30, 64 
two meanings of, 16o-61 
as wisdom mind of the buddhas, 
145.151 
See also nature of mind 
mind instructions, ix-x, xiii, 14, 18, 19, 
2J,80,8J,93.94 
mind-only school, So, 91 
mind training, 17, 3o-31, 64 
mindfulness, 37, 146-47, 158,160, 162-65, 
176, 180, 206 
misdeeds 
and karma, 47-49 
giving up, 10, 34, 161 
identifying, 52-54, 217, 22.2. 
initiated by mind, 59 
as obstacle to pure realms, 9 
purifying, 36-38,171, 222 
regretting, 4, 26 
results of, 34, 52, 53, 59 
Moonbeams ofMahamudra, S:z., 181 
motivation, 2, 6, 36,47-48, 51-53. See 
also intention 
239 
INDEX 
Nagarjuna, 94--95, 131, 156-57, 170 
natural state, 124, 174, 190--94, 206, 230 
naturally liberated awareness, 150 
Naturally Liberating Whatever You Meet, 
xiii,14, 19, 215, 221-33 
nature of mind, 8·, 23, 75,108,109, 132, 
134,138,145,152-53 
appearances and the, 20, 103 
coemergence and, 82 
directly seeing the, 128, 135, 162, 166, 
170 
emptiness of the, 76-n, 97, 104 
four traditions of Tibet and,141-44 
insight meditation and, 117, 120 
karma and, 17o-72 
as neither something nor nothing, 
104~6 
Nyingma tantras and, 140 
as transcendent intelligence, 138 
resting in, 112, 124-25, 160-61, 177, 209 
nine methods for resting the mind, 
117-19 
nonconceptual mental consciousness, 
108 
nonvirtue 
and karma, 47-49 
cause of, 170 
as cause of suffering, 34 
decreasing, 26 
distinguishing from virtue, 52-57 
giving up, 31, 34, 59, 161 
initiated by mind, 59, 62, 222 
realization and unvirtuous acts,161, 
17Q-71 
results of, 52,171, 172, 217,222 
strong and weak, 47-48 
unvirtuous speech, 145 
unvirtuous thoughts, 99, 124 
nyonmong, translation of, 182. See also 
affliction 
obscurations, 9, 21, 140, 161 
afflictive and cognitive, 37 
purifying, 36-38, 222 ordinary mind, 19, n2, 122-25, 143 
Ornament of Clear Realization, The, 126 
other-empty school, 71-72 
Paldarbum, 89--90 
pandita, meaning of, 43-44 
Patrul Rinpoche, 28 
peaceful and wrathful deities, 99, 201 
perceived objects, 83--93, 128-29, 
148-49. 151, 223-24 
phurba, 12, 6o-61 
phowa,2o8 
pointing-out instructions, 82, 117, 
131-32, 221, 225 
Pointing Out the Dharmakaya, 82, 91 
poisons, 68, 96, 150, 182, 207. See also 
afflictions 
postmeditation, 157-58 
posture, 117, 122 
practices that require effort, 10, 22 
prajiiti. See intelligence 
prajiidpdramita. See transcendent intel-
ligence 
precious human body, 25,32 
pride, 184,187-88,192--93, 230 
propelling karma, 48-49 
prophecy, 8--9 
prostration, 2o-21 
pure land(s), 8-ro 
radiance 
of the dharmakaya, 83 
of the mind, 151 
of the dharma nature, 202 
See also luminosity 
Rangjung Dorje. See Karmapa Rang-
jung Dorje 
Ratna Lingpa,19o-93, 230 
realization, 40-41, 81, 136-38,144,227 
rebirth, 46, 48, 188, 2oo-2o1, 230 
refuge, 35-36, 221-22 
regret, 26, 48, 197--98 
relative and ultimate truth, 56, 68 
resolving, 121, 132, 225 
INDEX 
resonance of the dharma nature, 202-6 
resting in equipoise, m-12, 126, 130, 133, 
144, 162, 206 
resting in naturalness, 38, 135, 162, 
173-74. 177, 179. 206 
resting meditation of a kusulu, 43-44. 
II1-66, 173, 209, 2ll, 225 
rigpa. See awareness (rigpa) 
Sakya School, 139,142-44, 227 
Sakya Pandita, 86 
samadhi 
Buddha in, 66-67 
hope and fear absent in, 162 
non-fixation and, 144 
purification of mind in, 164 
suppression of afflictions in, 195 
thoughts in, 135 
unceasing clarity in, 128 
See also equipoise 
samsara, 9-10, 34, 188 
indivisibility from nirvana, 143, 227 
mind as basis of nirvana and, 104-5, 
217,225 
sangha,35 
Sarma, 5, 139, 210 
scholars, 105, 144, 156-57 
Second Treasury of Ratna Lingpa, 191, 
230 
second wheel, 71-73, 137-38 
secret mantra, secret mantra vajrayana. 
See vajrayana 
self-awareness, 21, 77, 82, 86-87, 108, 192 
self-aware direct perception, 108-9 
self-clinging, clinging to a self, 68-70, 
148. See also ego-clinging. 
self-empty school, 71-72 
self-liberation, 169, 228, 230 
selflessness, 10 
of phenomena, 16, 71, 136 
of the individual, 16, 68-71, 74-75, 136 
sense consciousnesses. See conscious­
ness: sense 
sense faculties, 86, 88,108, 128-29 senses, objects of, 83-93, 108, 128-29, 
148, 151, 186-87, 223-24 
Seven Treasunes of Longchenpa, 79 
seventh consciousness. See conscious-
ness: afflicted mind 
shamatha. See tranquility meditation 
Shantideva, 26, 39, 63,119, 183 
Shechen Gyaltsap Gyurme Perna Nam-
gyal,6,19 
Shechen Kongtrul Rinpoche, 6-7, 19 
Shechen Monastery, 6-7, 18 
Short Vajradhara Lineage Prayer, 40, 113, 
129 
sickness, 173, 179-81 
six classes of beings, 188, 230 
six consciousnesses. See consciousness: 
six 
six transcendences, 73, 76 
six yogas ofNaropa, 22 
sleep, 206-8 
sound(s), 83-87, 90, 128-29,147-50 
speech, so-sl, 54-62, 133-34. 145. 151, 
222-23,226 
spontaneous presence, 82, 102-3, 142, 
169, 205, 226, 231 
stability, 117-20 
subsequent application, 30, 221 
suffering, 34, 52, 64. 70 
Supreme Continuum, The, 7, 126, 151-52 
Surmang Dutsi Til monastery, 7, 12, 14 
sutra(s), 40, 76, 95-96, 102, 123, 127, 
137-41.213 
Takpo Tashi Namgyal, 82, 146-47, 165, 
181 
tantra(s), 22, 136,138-40, 221,226 
Teachings on the Buddha Nature, 143, 
218,227 
termas. See treasures 
tenons, n-12, 14, 190 
Third Wheel, 73-75, 137-38 
thogal, 22, 205, 231 
Thrangu Monastery, ix, 12, 14-15, 18, 215 
Three jewels and Roots, 35 
INDEX 
tranquility meditation, 37, 59, u6-2.o, 
12.7,130 
transcendent giving, generosity, 39, 73 
transcendent intelligence, knowledge, 
71, 73. 137-38. 2.2.6 
Treasure ofValid Logic, 86 
trekcho, 2.05 
Trungpa Rinpoche, Chogyam, 7, 12.-13, 
18,181 
Trungpa Rinpoche, Tenth, Chokyi 
Nyinche,7 
Trungpa tulkus, 12.-13 
Tsongkhapa,~-42.,2.2.6 
tummo, 2.2., 75, 197 
union 
of clarity and emptiness, 74, 77, 12.3, 
128, 142., 191 
of sound and emptiness, 134 
of wisdom and the expanse, 12.3, 138 
understanding, 8o-81, 95-96, 12.7-2.8, 
~-42. 
unexcelled yoga tantra, 2.2., 140, 2.2.6 
Vairochana, 99 
Vajradhara, 2.o-2.1, 95 
Vajrasartva, 36-38, 2.2.2. 
vajrayana, 16, 2.2., 2.7, 31, 35, 39-40, 73-78, 
95--96, 138-39 
valid perception, validity, 108--9. See also 
logic 
vehicles, 16, 2.2., 68,74-75, 137 victors, victorious ones, 104, 145, 149, 
2.2.5-2.7 
virtue 
and karma, 47-49 
cause of, 170 
defiled, 172. 
distinguishing from nonvinue, 52.-57 
identifying, 52.-54, 2.17, 2.2.2. 
initiated by mind, 59, 61, 62., 2.2.2. 
need to practice, 62. 
realization and, 17o-71 
results of, 52., 59, 171, 172., 2.17, 2.2.2. 
strong and weak, 47-48 
taking up, 34, 59, 161 
vinuous thoughts, 99, 12.4 
visualization, 37-39, 75, 139-40 
Way of the Bodhisattva, The, 39, 183 
wisdom 
as clarity, 74, 12.8 
Buddha's, 74 
dharmadhatu, 192., 2.30 
discriminating, 193, 2.30 
of equality, 192.--93, 2.30 
mirror-like, 189--91, 2.30 
of self-awareness, 77 
as translation of ye shes, xi 
wonhy student(s), 2.1-2.2. 2.5-2.6, 2.2.1 
world-weariness, 2.6-2.7 
wrongdoing. See misdeeds 
yidam deity, 35, 75 
